<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="argument-8" epub:type="preamble">
				<header>
					<p>The Argument</p>
				</header>
				<p>Adam inquires concerning celestial motions; is doubtfully answered, and exhorted to search rather things more worthy of knowledge. Adam assents, and, still desirous to detain Raphael, relates to him what he remembered since his own creation: his placing in Paradise; his talk with God concerning solitude and fit society; his first meeting and nuptials with Eve. His discourse with the Angel thereupon; who, after admonitions repeated, departs.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="poem-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>The Angel ended, and in Adam’s ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So charming left his voice that he a while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought him still speaking, still stood fixed to hear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, as new-waked, thus gratefully replied:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What thanks sufficient, or what recompense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equal, have I to render thee, divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Historian, who thus largely hast allayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thirst I had of knowledge, and vouchsafed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This friendly condescension to relate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things else by me unsearchable, now heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wonder, but delight, and, as is due,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With glory attributed to the high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creator? Something yet of doubt remains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which only thy solution can resolve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I behold this goodly frame, this World</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Heaven and Earth consisting, and compute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their magnitudes; this Earth, a spot, a grain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An atom, with the firmament compared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her numbered stars, that seem to roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spaces incomprehensible (for such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their distance argues, and their swift return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diurnal) merely to officiate light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One day and night, in all their vast survey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Useless besides; reasoning I oft admire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Nature, wise and frugal, could commit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such disproportions, with superfluous hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many nobler bodies to create,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greater so manifold, to this one use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For aught appears, and on their orbs impose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such restless revolution day by day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repeated, while the sedentary Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That better might with far less compass move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Served by more noble than herself, attains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her end without least motion, and receives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As tribute, such a sumless journey brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speed, to describe whose swiftness number fails.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake our sire, and by his countenance seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entering on studious thoughts abstruse; which Eve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perceiving, where she sat retired in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lowliness majestic from her seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grace that won who saw to wish her stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose, and went forth among her fruits and flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To visit how they prospered, bud and bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her nursery; they at her coming sprung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, touched by her fair tendance, gladlier grew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet went she not as not with such discourse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delighted, or not capable her ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what was high: such pleasure she reserved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adam relating, she sole auditress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her husband the relater she preferred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the Angel, and of him to ask</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chose rather; he, she knew, would intermix</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With conjugal caresses:⁠—from his lip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not words alone pleased her. Oh, when meet now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such pairs, in love and mutual honour joined?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With goddess-like demeanour forth she went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not unattended; for on her as queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pomp of winning Graces waited still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from about her shot darts of desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into all eyes, to wish her still in sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Raphael now to Adam’s doubt proposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Benevolent and facile thus replied:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To ask or search I blame thee not; for heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is as the Book of God before thee set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein to read his wondrous works, and learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His seasons, hours, or days, or months, or years:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This to attain, whether heaven move or Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imports not, if thou reckon right; the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Man or Angel the great Architect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His secrets, to be scanned by them who ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather admire. Or if they list to try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conjecture, he his fabric of the heavens</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His laughter at their quaint opinions wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hereafter, when they come to model heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And calculate the stars; how they will wield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty frame; how build, unbuild, contrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save appearances; how gird the sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With centric and eccentric scribbled o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already by thy reasoning this I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who art to lead thy offspring, and supposest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bodies bright and greater should not serve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The less not bright, nor heaven such journeys run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth sitting still, when she alone receives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The benefit. Consider, first, that great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or bright infers not excellence: the Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though, in comparison of heaven, so small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor glistering, may of solid good contain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More plenty than the sun that barren shines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose virtue on itself works no effect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the fruitful Earth; there first received,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His beams, unactive else, their vigour find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet not to Earth are those bright luminaries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Officious, but to thee, Earth’s habitant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the heaven’s wide circuit, let it speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Maker’s high magnificence, who built</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So spacious, and his line stretched out so far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Man may know he dwells not in his own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An edifice too large for him to fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lodged in a small partition, and the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ordained for uses to his Lord best known.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The swiftness of those circles attribute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though numberless, to his omnipotence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to corporeal substances could add</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speed almost spiritual. Me thou think’st not slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who since the morning-hour set out from Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where God resides, and ere mid-day arrived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Eden, distance inexpressible</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By numbers that have name. But this I urge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admitting motion in the heavens, to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invalid that which thee to doubt it moved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that I so affirm, though so it seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God, to remove his ways from human sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Placed heaven from Earth so far, that earthly sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it presume, might err in things too high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no advantage gain. What if the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be centre to the World, and other stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By his attractive virtue and their own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incited, dance about him various rounds?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their wandering course, now high, now low, then hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Progressive, retrograde, or standing still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In six thou seest; and what if seventh to these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The planet Earth, so steadfast though she seem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insensibly three different motions move?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which else to several spheres thou must ascribe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved contrary with thwart obliquities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or save the sun his labour, and that swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nocturnal and diurnal rhomb supposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invisible else above all stars, the wheel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of day and night; which needs not thy belief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Earth, industrious of herself, fetch day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Travelling east, and with her part averse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the sun’s beam meet night, her other part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still luminous by his ray. What if that light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the terrestrial moon be as a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enlightening her by day, as she by night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Earth⁠—reciprocal, if land be there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fields and inhabitants? Her spots thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As clouds, and clouds may rain, and rain produce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fruits in her softened soil, for some to eat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Allotted there; and other suns, perhaps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their attendant moons, thou wilt descry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Communicating male and female light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which two great sexes animate the World,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stored in each orb perhaps with some that live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such vast room in Nature unpossessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By living soul, desert and desolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each orb a glimpse of light, conveyed so far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to this habitable, which returns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light back to them, is obvious to dispute.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But whether thus these things, or whether not⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the sun, predominant in heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He from the east his flaming road begin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or she from west her silent course advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On her soft axle, while she paces even,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bears thee soft with the smooth air along⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Solicit not thy thoughts with matters hid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave them to God above; him serve and fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of other creatures, as him pleases best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherever placed, let him dispose; joy thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In what he gives to thee, this Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy fair Eve; Heaven is for thee too high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know what passes there; be lowly wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think only what concerns thee and thy being;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dream not of other worlds, what creatures there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live, in what state, condition, or degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contented that thus far hath been revealed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not of Earth only, but of highest Heaven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom thus Adam, cleared of doubt, replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How fully hast thou satisfied me, pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intelligence of Heaven, Angel serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, freed from intricacies, taught to live</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To interrupt the sweet of life, from which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not molest us, unless we ourselves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek them with wandering thoughts, and notions vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But apt the mind or fancy is to rove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unchecked; and of her roving is no end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till warned, or by experience taught, she learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That not to know at large of things remote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From use, obscure and subtle, but to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which before us lies in daily life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the prime wisdom: what is more is fume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or emptiness, or fond impertinence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And renders us in things that most concern</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unpractised, unprepared, and still to seek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore from this high pitch let us descend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lower flight, and speak of things at hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Useful; whence haply mention may arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of something not unseasonable to ask,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sufferance, and thy wonted favour, deigned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee I have heard relating what was done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere my remembrance; now hear me relate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My story, which perhaps thou hast not heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And day is yet not spent; till then thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How subtly to detain thee I devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inviting thee to hear while I relate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fond, were it not in hope of thy reply.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than fruits of palm-tree, pleasantest to thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hunger both, from labour, at the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sweet repast: they satiate, and soon fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though pleasant; but thy words, with grace divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satiety.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom thus Raphael answered, Heavenly meek:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of Men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abundantly his gifts hath also poured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inward and outward both, his image fair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speaking or mute, all comeliness and grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attends thee, and each word, each motion, forms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor less think we in Heaven of thee on Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than of our fellow-servant, and inquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gladly into the ways of God with Man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For God, we see, hath honoured thee, and set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Man his equal love. Say therefore on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I that day was absent, as befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far on excursion toward the gates of Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Squared in full legion (such command we had),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see that none thence issued forth a spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or enemy, while God was in his work;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest he, incensed at such eruption bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Destruction with Creation might have mixed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that they durst without his leave attempt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But us he sends upon his high behests</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For state, as sovereign King, and to inure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our prompt obedience. Fast we found, fast shut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dismal gates, and barricadoed strong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, long ere our approaching, heard, within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Noise, other than the sound of dance or song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad we returned up to the coasts of light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere Sabbath-evening; so we had in charge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thy relation now; for I attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleased with thy words no less than thou with mine.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake the godlike Power, and thus our sire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“For Man to tell how human life began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is hard; for who himself beginning knew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire with thee still longer to converse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Induced me. As new-waked from soundest sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft on the flowery herb I found me laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In balmy sweat, which with his beams the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon dried, and on the reeking moisture fed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight toward Heaven my wondering eyes I turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gazed a while the ample sky, till raised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By quick instinctive motion up I sprung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thitherward endeavouring, and upright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood on my feet. About me round I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hill, dale, and shady woods, and sunny plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And liquid lapse of murmuring streams; by these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creatures that lived and moved, and walked or flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Birds on the branches warbling; all things smiled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fragrance and with joy my heart o’erflowed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself I then perused, and limb by limb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With supple joints, as lively vigour led;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who I was, or where, or from what cause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knew not. To speak I tried, and forthwith spake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tongue obeyed, and readily could name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er I saw. ‘Thou Sun,’ said I, ‘fair light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou enlightened Earth, so fresh and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye hills and dales, ye rivers, woods, and plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ye that live and move, fair creatures, tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not of myself; by some great Maker then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In goodness and in power pre-eminent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me, how may I know him, how adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whom I have that thus I move and live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feel that I am happier than I know!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While thus I called, and strayed I knew not whither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From where I first drew air, and first beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This happy light, when answer none returned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a green shady bank, profuse of flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pensive I sat me down; there gentle sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First found me, and with soft oppression seized</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My drowsed sense, untroubled, though I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I then was passing to my former state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When suddenly stood at my head a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose inward apparition gently moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fancy to believe I yet had being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lived. One came, methought, of shape divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, ‘Thy mansion wants thee, Adam; rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First Man, of men innumerable ordained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First father! called by thee, I come thy guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the garden of bliss, thy seat prepared.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So saying, by the hand he took me, raised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over fields and waters, as in air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smooth sliding without step, last led me up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woody mountain, whose high top was plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A circuit wide, enclosed, with goodliest trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Planted, with walks and bowers, that what I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemed. Each tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loaden with fairest fruit, that hung to the eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tempting, stirred in me sudden appetite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pluck and eat; whereat I waked, and found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before mine eyes all real, as the dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had lively shadowed. Here had new begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My wandering, had not He, who was my guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up hither, from among the trees appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presence Divine. Rejoicing, but with awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In adoration at his feet I fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Submiss. He reared me, and, ‘Whom thou sought’st I am,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said mildly, ‘Author of all this thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above, or round about thee, or beneath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Paradise I give thee; count it thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To till and keep, and of the fruit to eat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every tree that in the garden grows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eat freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of the Tree whose operation brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowledge of good and ill, which I have set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pledge of thy obedience and thy faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the garden by the Tree of Life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember what I warn thee, shun to taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shun the bitter consequence: for know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day thou eat’st thereof, my sole command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transgressed, inevitably thou shalt die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that day mortal, and this happy state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shalt lose, expelled from hence into a world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of woe and sorrow.’ Sternly he pronounced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rigid interdiction, which resounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to incur; but soon his clear aspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Returned, and gracious purpose thus renewed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Not only these fair bounds, but all the Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee and to thy race I give; as lords</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possess it, and all things that therein live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or live in sea or air⁠—beast, fish, and fowl.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sign whereof, each bird, and beast behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After their kinds; I bring them to receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thee their names, and pay thee fealty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With low subjection; understand the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fish within their watery residence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not hither summoned, since they cannot change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their element to draw the thinner air.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thus he spake, each bird and beast behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approaching two and two; these cowering low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blandishment; each bird stooped on his wing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I named them as they passed, and understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their nature; with such knowledge God endued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sudden apprehension. But in these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found not what, methought, I wanted still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Heavenly Vision thus presumed:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘O, by what name⁠—for thou above all these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above mankind, or aught than mankind higher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surpassest far my naming⁠—how may I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adore thee, Author of this Universe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all this good to Man, for whose well-being</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So amply, and with hands so liberal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast provided all things? But with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see not who partakes. In solitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What happiness? who can enjoy alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, all enjoying, what contentment find?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus I presumptuous; and the Vision bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with a smile more brightened, thus replied:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘What call’st thou solitude? Is not the Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With various living creatures, and the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replenished, and all these at thy command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To come and play before thee? Know’st thou not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their language and their ways? They also know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reason not contemptibly; with these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Find pastime, and bear rule; thy realm is large.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So spake the universal Lord, and seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So ordering. I, with leave of speech implored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And humble deprecation, thus replied:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Maker, be propitious while I speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou not made me here thy substitute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these inferior far beneath me set?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among unequals what society</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can sort, what harmony or true delight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which must be mutual, in proportion, due</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Given and received; but in disparity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one intense, the other still remiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tedious alike. Of fellowship I speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as I seek, fit to participate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All rational delight, wherein the brute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot be human consort: they rejoice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each with their kind, lion with lioness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So well converse, nor with the ox the ape;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worse then can man with beast, and least of all.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘A nice and subtle happiness, I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy associates, Adam, and wilt taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What think’st thou then of me, and this my state?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happiness, or not? who am alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all eternity; for none I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Second to me or like, equal much less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How have I then with whom to hold converse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save with the creatures which I made, and those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me inferior, infinite descents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath what other creatures are to thee?’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He ceased; I lowly answered: ‘To attain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The highth and depth of thy eternal ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou in thyself art perfect, and in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is no deficience found; not so is Man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in degree⁠—the cause of his desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By conversation with his like to help</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or solace his defects. No need that thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should’st propagate, already infinite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through all numbers absolute, though One;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Man by number is to manifest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His single imperfection, and beget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like of his like, his image multiplied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In unity defective; which requires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Collateral love, and dearest amity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, in thy secrecy although alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Best with thyself accompanied, seek’st not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Social communication; yet, so pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canst raise thy creature to what highth thou wilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of union or communion, deified;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, by conversing, cannot these erect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From prone, nor in their ways complacence find.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Permissive, and acceptance found; which gained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This answer from the gracious Voice Divine:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And find thee knowing not of beasts alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which thou hast rightly named, but of thyself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expressing well the spirit within thee free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My image, not imparted to the brute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose fellowship therefore, unmeet for thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be so minded still. I, ere thou spak’st,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knew it not good for Man to be alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no such company as then thou saw’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intended thee⁠—for trial only brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see how thou couldst judge of fit and meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy wish exactly to thy heart’s desire.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He ended, or I heard no more; for now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My earthly by his Heavenly overpowered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which it had long stood under, strained to the highth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that celestial colloquy sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with an object that excels the sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dazzled and spent, sunk down, and sought repair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes he closed, but open left the cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fancy, my internal sight; by which,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abstract as in a trance, methought I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the Shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still glorious before whom awake I stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who stooping opened my left side, and took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rib he formed and fashioned with his hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his forming hands a creature grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man-like, but different sex, so lovely fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That what seemed fair in all the world seemed now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her looks, which from that time infused</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweetness into my heart unfelt before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And into all things from her air inspired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spirit of love and amorous delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She disappeared, and left me dark; I waked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find her, or for ever to deplore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, out of hope, behold her not far off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make her amiable. On she came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Led by her Heavenly Maker, though unseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And guided by his voice, nor uninformed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nuptial sanctity and marriage rites.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every gesture dignity and love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, overjoyed, could not forbear aloud:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘This turn hath made amends; thou hast fulfilled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giver of all things fair, but fairest this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all thy gifts! nor enviest. I now see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, my self</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before me; Woman is her name, of Man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extracted; for this cause he shall forgo</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Father and mother, and to his wife adhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they shall be one flesh, one heart, one soul.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“She heard me thus; and, though divinely brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet innocence and virgin modesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her virtue and the conscience of her worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more desirable⁠—or, to say all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature herself, though pure of sinful thought⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I followed her; she what was honour knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with obsequious majesty approved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pleaded reason. To the nuptial bower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I led her blushing like the Morn; all Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And happy constellations, on that hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shed their selectest influence; the Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joyous the birds; fresh gales and gentle airs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispered it to the woods, and from their wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flung rose, flung odours from the spicy shrub,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disporting, till the amorous bird of night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sung spousal, and bid haste the evening star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On his hill-top to light the bridal lamp.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus have I told thee all my state, and brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My story to the sum of earthly bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I enjoy, and must confess to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all things else delight indeed, but such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, used or not, works in the mind no change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor vehement desire⁠—these delicacies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mean of taste, sight, smell, herbs, fruits, and flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walks, and the melody of birds: but here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far otherwise, transported I behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transported touch; here passion first I felt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Superior and unmoved, here only weak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the charm of beauty’s powerful glance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Nature failed in me, and left some part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not proof enough such object to sustain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, from my side subducting, took perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than enough; at least on her bestowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too much of ornament, in outward show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Elaborate, of inward less exact.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well I understand in the prime end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nature her the inferior, in the mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And inward faculties, which most excel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In outward also her resembling less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His image who made both, and less expressing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The character of that dominion given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er other creatures. Yet when I approach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her loveliness, so absolute she seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in herself complete, so well to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her own, that what she wills to do or say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All higher Knowledge in her presence falls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Degraded; Wisdom in discourse with her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Authority and Reason on her wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one intended first, not after made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Occasionally; and to consummate all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greatness of mind and nobleness their seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Build in her loveliest, and create an awe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About her, as a guard angelic placed.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Angel, with contracted brow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Accuse not Nature, she hath done her part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do thou but thine, and be not diffident</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Wisdom; she deserts thee not, if thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dismiss not her, when most thou need’st her nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By attributing overmuch to things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less excellent, as thou thyself perceiv’st.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what admir’st thou, what transports thee so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An outside: fair, no doubt, and worthy well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not thy subjection. Weigh with her thyself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then value. Oft-times nothing profits more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than self-esteem, grounded on just and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well managed; of that skill the more thou know’st,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more she will acknowledge thee her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to realities yield all her shows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made so adorn for thy delight the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So awful, that with honour thou may’st love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if the sense of touch, whereby mankind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is propagated, seem such dear delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond all other, think the same vouchsafed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cattle and each beast; which would not be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them made common and divulged, if aught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul of Man, or passion in him move.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What higher in her society thou find’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attractive, human, rational, love still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In loving thou dost well; in passion not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein true love consists not. Love refines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thoughts, and heart enlarges; hath his seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Reason, and is judicious; is the scale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which to Heavenly love thou may’st ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not sunk in carnal pleasure; for which cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the beasts no mate for thee was found.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom thus, half abashed, Adam replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In procreation common to all kinds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though higher of the genial bed by far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with mysterious reverence, I deem),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much delights me as those graceful acts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those thousand decencies, that daily flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all her words and actions, mixed with love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Union of mind, or in us both one soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harmony to behold in wedded pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who meet with various objects, from the sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Variously representing, yet, still free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approve the best, and follow what I approve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To love thou blam’st me not; for love, thou say’st,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love not the Heavenly Spirits, and how their love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Express they? by looks only, or do they mix</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Celestial rosy-red, love’s proper hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answered: “Let it suffice thee that thou know’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us happy, and without love no happiness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever pure thou in the body enjoy’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(And pure thou wert created) we enjoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In eminence, and obstacle find none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Total they mix, union of pure with pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desiring, nor restrained conveyance need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I can now no more; the parting sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the Earth’s green Cape and verdant Isles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hesperean sets, my signal to depart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be strong, live happy, and love! but first of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him whom to love is to obey, and keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His great command; take heed lest passion sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy judgment to do aught which else free will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would not admit; thine and of all thy sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weal or woe in thee is placed; beware!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I in thy persevering shall rejoice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the Blest. Stand fast; to stand or fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free in thine own arbitrement it lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perfect within, no outward aid require;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all temptation to transgress repel.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Followed with benediction: “Since to part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, Heavenly guest, Ethereal messenger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent from whose sovereign goodness I adore!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gentle to me and affable hath been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With grateful memory; thou to Mankind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be good and friendly still, and oft return!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So parted they, the Angel up to Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the thick shade, and Adam to his bower.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
