<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></h2>
			<section id="argument-6" epub:type="preamble">
				<header>
					<p>The Argument</p>
				</header>
				<p>Raphael continues to relate how Michael and Gabriel were sent forth to battle against Satan and his Angels. The first fight described: Satan and his Powers retire under night; he calls a council; invents devilish engines, which, in the second day’s fight, put Michael and his Angels to some disorder; but they at length, pulling up mountains, overwhelmed both the force and machines of Satan. Yet, the tumult not so ending, God, on the third day, sends Messiah his Son, for whom he had reserved the glory of that victory. He, in the power of his Father, coming to the place, and causing all his legions to stand still on either side, with his chariot and thunder driving into the midst of his enemies, pursues them, unable to resist, towards the wall of Heaven; which opening, they leap down with horror and confusion into the place of punishment prepared for them in the deep. Messiah returns with triumph to his Father.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="poem-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“All night the dreadless Angel unpursued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Heaven’s wide champain held his way, till Morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waked by the circling Hours, with rosy hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unbarred the gates of light. There is a cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the mount of God, fast by his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where light and darkness in perpetual round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grateful vicissitude, like day and night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light issues forth, and at the other door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obsequious darkness enters, till her hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To veil the Heaven, though darkness there might well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem twilight here. And now went forth the Morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as in highest Heaven, arrayed in gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empyreal; from before her vanished Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shot through with orient beams; when all the plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Covered with thick embattled squadrons bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chariots, and flaming arms, and fiery steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>War he perceived, war in procinct, and found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already known what he for news had thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have reported; gladly then he mixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among those friendly powers, who him received</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With joy and acclamations loud, that one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of so many myriads fallen yet one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Returned not lost. On to the sacred hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They led him high applauded, and present</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the seat supreme; from whence a voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From midst a golden cloud, thus mild was heard:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Servant of God, well done! Well hast thou fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The better fight, who single hast maintained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against revolted multitudes the cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of truth, in word mightier than they in arms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the testimony of truth hast borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Universal reproach, far worse to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than violence; for this was all thy care⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stand approved in sight of God, though worlds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Judged thee perverse. The easier conquest now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remains thee⁠—aided by this host of friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back on thy foes more glorious to return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than scorned thou didst depart, and to subdue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By force who reason for their law refuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right reason for their law, and for their King</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Messiah, who by right of merit reigns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, Michael, of celestial armies prince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, in military prowess next,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gabriel; lead forth to battle these my sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invincible; lead forth my armed Saints,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thousands and by millions ranged for fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equal in number to that godless crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rebellious; them with fire and hostile arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearless assault, and, to the brow of Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursuing, drive them out from God and bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into their place of punishment, the gulf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Tartarus, which ready opens wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fiery chaos to receive their fall.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So spake the Sovran Voice, and clouds began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To darken all the hill, and smoke to roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dusky wreaths reluctant flames, the sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wrath awaked; nor with less dread the loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ethereal trumpet from on high gan blow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which command the powers militant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stood for Heaven, in mighty quadrate joined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of union irresistible, moved on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In silence their bright legions, to the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of instrumental harmony, that breathed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heroic ardour to adventurous deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under their godlike leaders, in the cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of God and his Messiah. On they move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indissolubly firm; nor obvious hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor straitening vale, nor wood, nor stream, divides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their perfect ranks; for high above the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their march was, and the passive air upbore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their nimble tread; as when the total kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of birds, in orderly array, on wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came summoned over Eden to receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their names of thee; so over many a tract</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Heaven they marched, and many a province wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tenfold the length of this terrene. At last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in the horizon to the North, appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From skirt to skirt a fiery region, stretched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In battailous aspect; and, nearer view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bristled with upright beams innumerable</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rigid spears, and helmets thronged, and shields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Various, with boastful argument portrayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The banded powers of Satan hasting on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With furious expedition; for they weened</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That self-same day, by fight or by surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To win the mount of God, and on his throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To set the envier of his state, the proud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aspirer; but their thoughts proved fond and vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the mid-way. Though strange to us it seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first that Angel should with Angel war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in fierce hosting meet, who wont to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So oft in festivals of joy and love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hymning the Eternal Father. But the shout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of battle now began, and rushing sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of onset ended soon each milder thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High in the midst, exalted as a god,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Apostate in his sun-bright chariot sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Idol of majesty divine, enclosed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flaming Cherubim and golden shields;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then lighted from his gorgeous throne, for now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt host and host but narrow space was left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dreadful interval, and front to front</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presented stood, in terrible array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hideous length. Before the cloudy van,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the rough edge of battle ere it joined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Satan, with vast and haughty strides advanced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came towering, armed in adamant and gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abdiel that sight endured not, where he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus his own undaunted heart explores:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘O Heaven! that such resemblance of the Highest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should yet remain, where faith and realty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remain not! Wherefore should not strength and might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There fail where virtue fails, or weakest prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where boldest, though to sight unconquerable?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His puissance, trusting in the Almighty’s aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mean to try, whose reason I have tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he who in debate of truth hath won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should win in arms, in both disputes alike</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Victor; though brutish that contest and foul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When reason hath to deal with force, yet so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most reason is that reason overcome.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So pondering, and from his armed peers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth-stepping opposite, half-way he met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daring foe, at this prevention more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incensed, and thus securely him defied:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Proud, art thou met? Thy hope was to have reached</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The highth of thy aspiring unopposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The throne of God unguarded, and his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abandoned at the terror of thy power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or potent tongue. Fool! not to think how vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the Omnipotent to rise in arms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, out of smallest things, could without end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have raised incessant armies to defeat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy folly; or with solitary hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reaching beyond all limit, at one blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unaided could have finished thee, and whelmed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy legions under darkness! But thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All are not of thy train; there be who faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prefer, and piety to God, though then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee not visible when I alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed in thy world erroneous to dissent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all: my sect thou seest; now learn too late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How few sometimes may know, when thousands err.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whom the grand Foe, with scornful eye askance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus answered: ‘Ill for thee, but in wished hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my revenge, first sought for, thou return’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From flight, seditious Angel, to receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy merited reward, the first assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this right hand provoked, since first that tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inspired with contradiction, durst oppose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A third part of the gods, in synod met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their deities to assert; who, while they feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vigour divine within them, can allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Omnipotence to none. But well thou com’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before thy fellows, ambitious to win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From me some plume, that thy success may show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Destruction to the rest. This pause between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Unanswered lest thou boast) to let thee know⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first I thought that liberty and Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To heavenly souls had been all one; but now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see that most through sloth had rather serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ministering Spirits, trained up in feast and song:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such hast thou armed, the minstrelsy of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Servility with freedom to contend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As both their deeds compared this day shall prove.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To whom, in brief, thus Abdiel stern replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apostate! still thou err’st, nor end wilt find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of erring, from the path of truth remote.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unjustly thou deprav’st it with the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of servitude, to serve whom God ordains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Nature: God and Nature bid the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he who rules is worthiest, and excels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them whom he governs. This is servitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To serve the unwise, or him who hath rebelled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself not free, but to thyself enthralled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet lewdly dar’st our ministering upbraid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reign thou in Hell, thy kingdom; let me serve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heaven God ever blest, and his divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behests obey, worthiest to be obeyed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet chains in Hell, not realms, expect: meanwhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From me returned, as erst thou saidst, from flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This greeting on thy impious crest receive.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the proud crest of Satan that no sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor motion of swift thought, less could his shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such ruin intercept. Ten paces huge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He back recoiled; the tenth on bended knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His massy spear upstayed: as if, on Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Winds under ground, or waters forcing way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sidelong had pushed a mountain from his seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-sunk with all his pines. Amazement seized</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rebel Thrones, but greater rage, to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus foiled their mightiest; ours joy filled, and shout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presage of victory, and fierce desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of battle: whereat Michael bid sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Archangel trumpet; through the vast of Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It sounded, and the faithful armies rung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hosannah to the Highest; nor stood at gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The adverse legions, nor less hideous joined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The horrid shock. Now storming fury rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clamour such as heard in Heaven till now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was never; arms on armour clashing brayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horrible discord, and the madding wheels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of brazen chariots raged; dire was the noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of conflict; overhead the dismal hiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fiery darts in flaming volleys flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, flying, vaulted either host with fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So under fiery cope together rushed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both battles main, with ruinous assault</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And inextinguishable rage; all Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resounded, and, had Earth been then, all Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had to her centre shook. What wonder, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Millions of fierce encountering Angels fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On either side, the least of whom could wield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These elements, and arm him with the force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all their regions? How much more of power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Army against army numberless to raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreadful combustion warring, and disturb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though not destroy, their happy native seat!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not the Eternal King Omnipotent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his stronghold of Heaven high overruled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And limited their might; though numbered such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As each divided legion might have seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A numerous host; in strength each armed hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A legion; led in fight, yet leader seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each warrior single as in chief⁠—expert</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of battle, open when, and when to close</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ridges of grim war. No thought of flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None of retreat, no unbecoming deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That argued fear; each on himself relied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As only in his arm the moment lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of victory. Deeds of eternal fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were done, but infinite; for wide was spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That war, and various: sometimes on firm ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A standing fight; then, soaring on main wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tormented all the air; all air seemed then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conflicting fire. Long time in even scale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The battle hung; till Satan, who that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prodigious power had shown, and met in arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No equal, ranging through the dire attack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fighting Seraphim confused, at length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw where the sword of Michael smote, and felled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Squadrons at once: with huge two-handed sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brandished aloft the horrid edge came down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide-wasting; such destruction to withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hasted, and opposed the rocky orb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tenfold adamant, his ample shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vast circumference. At his approach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great Archangel from his warlike toil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surceased, and, glad, as hoping here to end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intestine war in Heaven, the Arch-foe subdued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or captive dragged in chains, with hostile frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And visage all inflamed, first thus began:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unnamed in Heaven, now plenteous as thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These acts of hateful strife, hateful to all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though heaviest, by just measure, on thyself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy adherents: how hast thou disturbed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven’s blessed peace, and into Nature brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Misery, uncreated till the crime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy rebellion! how hast thou instilled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy malice into thousands, once upright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And faithful, now proved false! But think not here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trouble holy rest; Heaven casts thee out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all her confines; Heaven, the seat of bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brooks not the works of violence and war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence, then, and evil go with thee along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy offspring, to the place of evil, Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou and thy wicked crew! there mingle broils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere this avenging sword begin thy doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or some more sudden vengeance, winged from God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Precipitate thee with augmented pain.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So spake the prince of Angels; to whom thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Adversary: ‘Nor think thou with wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of airy threats to awe whom yet with deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not. Hast thou turned the least of these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To flight⁠—or, if to fall, but that they rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unvanquished⁠—easier to transact with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou shouldst hope, imperious, and with threats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To chase me hence? Err not that so shall end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strife which thou call’st evil, but we style</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strife of glory; which we mean to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or turn this Heaven itself into the Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou fablest; here, however, to dwell free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not to reign. Meanwhile, thy utmost force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(And join him named Almighty to thy aid)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fly not, but have sought thee far and nigh.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“They ended parle, and both addressed for fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Angels, can relate, or to what things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Liken on Earth conspicuous, that may lift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Human imagination to such highth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of godlike power? for likest gods they seemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood they or moved, in stature, motion, arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit to decide the empire of great Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now waved their fiery swords, and in the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made horrid circles; two broad suns their shields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blazed opposite, while Expectation stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In horror; from each hand with speed retired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where erst was thickest fight, the angelic throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left large field, unsafe within the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such commotion: such as (to set forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great things by small) if, Nature’s concord broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the constellations war were sprung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two planets, rushing from aspect malign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fiercest opposition, in mid sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should combat, and their jarring spheres confound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together both, with next to almighty arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplifted imminent, one stroke they aimed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That might determine, and not need repeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As not of power at once; nor odds appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In might or swift prevention. But the sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Michael from the armoury of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was given him tempered so, that neither keen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor solid might resist that edge: it met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sword of Satan, with steep force to smite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descending, and in half cut sheer; nor stayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, with swift wheel reverse, deep entering shared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All his right side. Then Satan first knew pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And writhed him to and fro convolved; so sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The griding sword with discontinuous wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passed through him; but the ethereal substance closed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long divisible, and from the gash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stream of nectarous humour issuing flowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sanguine, such as celestial Spirits may bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his armour stained, erewhile so bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Angels many and strong, who interposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Defence, while others bore him on their shields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to his chariot, where it stood retired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From off the files of war; there they him laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find himself not matchless, and his pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Humbled by such rebuke, so far beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His confidence to equal God in power.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet soon he healed; for Spirits, that live throughout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vital in every part⁠—not, as frail Man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In entrails, heart or head, liver or reins⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot but by annihilating die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in their liquid texture mortal wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive, no more than can the fluid air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All heart they live, all head, all eye, all ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All intellect, all sense; and as they please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assume, as likes them best, condense or rare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Meanwhile, in other parts, like deeds deserved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Memorial, where the might of Gabriel fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with fierce ensigns pierced the deep array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Moloch, furious king, who him defied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at his chariot-wheels to drag him bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Threatened, nor from the Holy One of Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refrained his tongue blasphemous; but anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down cloven to the waist, with shattered arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And uncouth pain fled bellowing. On each wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uriel and Raphael his vaunting foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though huge and in a rock of diamond armed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vanquished⁠—Adramelech and Asmadai,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two potent Thrones, that to be less than gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disdained, but meaner thoughts learned in their flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mangled with ghastly wounds through plate and mail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor stood unmindful Abdiel to annoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The atheist crew, but with redoubled blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ariel, and Arioch, and the violence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ramiel, scorched and blasted, overthrew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I might relate of thousands, and their names</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternize here on Earth; but those elect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angels, contented with their fame in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek not the praise of men; the other sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In might though wondrous and in acts of war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor of renown less eager, yet by doom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cancelled from Heaven and sacred memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For strength from truth divided, and from just,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illaudable, nought merits but dispraise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ignominy, yet to glory aspires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vain-glorious, and through infamy seeks fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore eternal silence be their doom.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And now, their mightiest quelled, the battle swerved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many an inroad gored; deformed rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entered, and foul disorder; all the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shivered armour strown, and on a heap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chariot and charioter lay overturned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fiery foaming steeds; what stood recoiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er-wearied, through the faint Satanic host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Defensive scarce, or with pale fear surprised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then first with fear surprised and sense of pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fled ignominious, to such evil brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sin of disobedience; till that hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not liable to fear, or flight, or pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far otherwise the inviolable Saints</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In cubic phalanx firm advanced entire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invulnerable, impenetrably armed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such high advantages their innocence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave them above their foes⁠—not to have sinned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to have disobeyed; in fight they stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By wound, though from their place by violence moved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now Night her course began, and, over Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inducing darkness, grateful truce imposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silence on the odious din of war;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under her cloudy covert both retired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Victor and vanquished. On the foughten field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Michael and his Angels prevalent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encamping placed in guard their watches round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cherubic waving fires: on the other part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Satan with his rebellious disappeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in the dark dislodged, and, void of rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His potentates to council called by night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the midst thus undismayed began:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘O now in danger tried, now known in arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to be overpowered, companions dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found worthy not of liberty alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too mean pretence, but, what we more affect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour, dominion, glory, and renown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who have sustained one day in doubtful fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(And if one day, why not eternal days?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Heaven’s Lord had powerfullest to send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against us from about his throne, and judged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sufficient to subdue us to his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But proves not so: then fallible, it seems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of future we may deem him, though till now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Omniscient thought. True is, less firmly armed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some disadvantage we endured, and pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till now not known, but, known, as soon contemned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since now we find this our empyreal form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incapable of mortal injury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imperishable, and, though pierced with wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon closing, and by native vigour healed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of evil, then, so small as easy think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The remedy: perhaps more valid arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weapons more violent, when next we meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May serve to better us and worse our foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or equal what between us made the odds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In nature none: if other hidden cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left them superior, while we can preserve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhurt our minds, and understanding sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Due search and consultation will disclose.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He sat; and in the assembly next upstood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nisroch, of Principalities the prime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one he stood escaped from cruel fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sore toiled, his riven arms to havoc hewn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, cloudy in aspect, thus answering spake:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enjoyment of our right as gods! yet hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For gods, and too unequal work, we find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against unequal arms to fight in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against unpained, impassive; from which evil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ruin must needs ensue; for what avails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Valour or strength, though matchless, quelled with pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mightiest? Sense of pleasure we may well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But live content, which is the calmest life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pain is perfect misery, the worst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of evils, and, excessive, overturns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All patience. He who, therefore, can invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what more forcible we may offend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our yet unwounded enemies, or arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ourselves with like defence, to me deserves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No less than for deliverance what we owe.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whereto, with look composed, Satan replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Not uninvented that, which thou aright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Believ’st so main to our success, I bring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which of us who beholds the bright surface</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this ethereous mould whereon we stand⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This continent of spacious Heaven, adorned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With plant, fruit, flower ambrosial, gems and gold⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose eye so superficially surveys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things, as not to mind from whence they grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep under ground, materials dark and crude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of spiritous and fiery spume, till touched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Heaven’s ray, and tempered, they shoot forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So beauteous, opening to the ambient light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These in their dark nativity the deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall yield us, pregnant with infernal flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, into hollow engines long and round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thick-rammed, at the other bore with touch of fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dilated and infuriate, shall send forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From far, with thundering noise, among our foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such implements of mischief as shall dash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pieces and o’erwhelm whatever stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor long shall be our labour; yet ere dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Effect shall end our wish. Meanwhile revive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think nothing hard, much less to be despaired.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He ended; and his words their drooping cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enlightened, and their languished hope revived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The invention all admired, and each how he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be the inventor missed; so easy it seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impossible. Yet, haply, of thy race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In future days, if malice should abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some one intent on mischief, or inspired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With devilish machination, might devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like instrument to plague the sons of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sin, on war and mutual slaughter bent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forthwith from council to the work they flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None arguing stood; innumerable hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were ready; in a moment up they turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide the celestial soil, and saw beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The originals of Nature in their crude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conception; sulphurous and nitrous foam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They found, they mingled, and, with subtle art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Concocted and adusted, they reduced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To blackest grain, and into store conveyed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part hidden veins digged up (nor hath this Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entrails unlike) of mineral and stone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereof to found their engines and their balls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of missive ruin; part incentive reed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So all ere day-spring, under conscious night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Secret they finished, and in order set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With silent circumspection, unespied.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now when fair Morn orient in Heaven appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up rose the victor Angels, and to arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The matin trumpet sung: in arms they stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of golden panoply, refulgent host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon banded; others from the dawning hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looked round, and scouts each coast light-armed scour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each quarter, to descry the distant foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where lodged, or whither fled, or if for fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In motion or in halt. Him soon they met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under spread ensigns moving nigh, in slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But firm battalion; back with speediest sail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zophiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came flying, and in mid air aloud thus cried:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Arm, warriors, arm for fight! The foe at hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This day; fear not his flight; so thick a cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He comes, and settled in his face I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad resolution and secure. Let each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His adamantine coat gird well, and each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit well his helm, gripe fast his orbed shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Borne even or high; for this day will pour down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I conjecture aught, no drizzling shower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rattling storm of arrows barbed with fire.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So warned he them, aware themselves, and soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In order, quit of all impediment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instant, without disturb, they took alarm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And onward move embattled: when, behold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not distant far, with heavy pace the foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approaching gross and huge; in hollow cube</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Training his devilish enginry, impaled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On every side with shadowing squadrons deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hide the fraud. At interview both stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A while; but suddenly at head appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Satan, and thus was heard commanding loud:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Vanguard, to right and left the front unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all may see who hate us, how we seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peace and composure, and with open breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand ready to receive them, if they like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our overture, and turn not back perverse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that I doubt: however, witness Heaven!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven, witness thou anon! while we discharge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freely our part. Ye, who appointed stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What we propound, and loud that all may hear.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So scoffing in ambiguous words, he scarce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had ended, when to right and left the front</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divided, and to either flank retired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to our eyes discovered, new and strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A triple mounted row of pillars laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On wheels (for like to pillars most they seemed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hollowed bodies made of oak or fir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With branches lopt, in wood or mountain felled),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brass, iron, stony mould, had not their mouths</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hideous orifice gaped on us wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Portending hollow truce. At each behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Seraph stood, and in his hand a reed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood waving tipt with fire; while we, suspense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Collected stood within our thoughts amused;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long, for sudden all, at once, their reeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put forth, and to a narrow vent applied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With nicest touch. Immediate in a flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon obscured with smoke, all Heaven appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From those deep-throated engines belched, whose roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embowelled with outrageous noise the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her entrails tore, disgorging foul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their devilish glut, chained thunderbolts and hail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of iron globes; which, on the victor host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Levelled, with such impetuous fury smote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whom they hit none on their feet might stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though standing else as rocks, but down they fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thousands, Angel on Archangel rolled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sooner for their arms: unarmed, they might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have easily, as Spirits, evaded swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By quick contraction or remove; but now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foul dissipation followed, and forced rout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor served it to relax their serried files.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What should they do? If on they rushed, repulse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repeated, and indecent overthrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubled, would render them yet more despised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to their foes a laughter; for in view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood ranked of Seraphim another row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In posture to displode their second tire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thunder; back defeated to return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They worse abhorred. Satan beheld their plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his mates thus in derision called:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘O friends, why come not on these victors proud?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Erewhile they fierce were coming; and when we,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To entertain them fair with open front</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breast (what could we more?), propounded terms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of composition, straight they changed their minds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they would dance: yet for a dance they seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhat extravagant and wild, perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For joy of offered peace. But I suppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If our proposals once again were heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We should compel them to a quick result.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To whom thus Belial, in like gamesome mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Leader, the terms we sent were terms of weight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hard contents, and full of force urged home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as we might perceive amused them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stumbled many: who receives them right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had need from head to foot well understand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not understood, this gift they have besides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They show us when our foes walk not upright.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So they among themselves in pleasant vein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood scoffing, highthened in their thoughts beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All doubt of victory; Eternal Might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To match with their inventions they presumed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So easy, and of his thunder made a scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his host derided, while they stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A while in trouble: but they stood not long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rage prompted them at length, and found them arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forthwith (behold the excellence, the power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which God hath in his mighty Angels placed!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their arms away they threw, and to the hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For Earth hath this variety from Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pleasure situate in hill and dale)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light as the lightning-glimpse they ran, they flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From their foundations loosening to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They plucked the seated hills, with all their load,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rocks, waters, woods, and by the shaggy tops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplifting bore them in their hands. Amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be sure, and terror seized the rebel host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When coming towards them so dread, they saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bottom of the mountains upward turned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till on those cursed engines’ triple row</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They saw them whelmed, and all their confidence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the weight of mountains buried deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves invaded next, and on their heads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Main promontories flung, which in the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came shadowing, and oppressed whole legions armed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their armour helped their harm, crushed in and bruised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into their substance pent, which wrought them pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Implacable, and many a dolorous groan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long struggling underneath, ere they could wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest, in imitation, to like arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betook them, and the neighbouring hills uptore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So hills amid the air encountered hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurled to and fro with jaculation dire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That underground they fought in dismal shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infernal noise! war seemed a civil game</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this uproar; horrid confusion heaped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon confusion rose. And now all Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not the Almighty Father, where he sits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shrined in his sanctuary of Heaven secure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consulting on the sum of things, foreseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This tumult, and permitted all, advised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That his great purpose he might so fulfil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To honour his anointed Son, avenged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his enemies, and to declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All power on him transferred: whence to his Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The assessor of his throne, he thus began:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Effulgence of my glory, Son beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son in whose face invisible is beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Visibly, what by Deity I am,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in whose hand what by decree I do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Second Omnipotence! two days are passed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two days, as we compute the days of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Michael and his powers went forth to tame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These disobedient. Sore hath been their fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As likeliest was when two such foes met armed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to themselves I left them; and thou know’st,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equal in their creation they were formed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save what sin hath impaired⁠—which yet hath wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insensibly, for I suspend their doom:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endless, and no solution will be found.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>War wearied hath performed what war can do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to disordered rage let loose the reins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mountains, as with weapons, armed; which makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wild work in Heaven, and dangerous to the main.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two days are, therefore, passed, the third is thine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thee I have ordained it, and thus far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have suffered, that the glory may be thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ending this great war, since none but thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can end it. Into thee such virtue and grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immense I have transfused, that all may know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heaven and Hell thy power above compare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this perverse commotion governed thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all things⁠—to be Heir and to be King</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sacred unction, thy deserved right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, then, thou Mightiest, in thy Father’s might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ascend my chariot, guide the rapid wheels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shake Heaven’s basis; bring forth all my war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My bow and thunder, my almighty arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gird on, and sword upon thy puissant thigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursue these Sons of Darkness, drive them out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all Heaven’s bounds into the utter deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There let them learn, as likes them, to despise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God and Messiah his anointed King.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He said, and on his Son with rays direct</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shone full; he all his Father full expressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ineffably into his face received;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus the Filial Godhead answering spake:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘O Father, O Supreme of Heavenly Thrones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First, Highest, Holiest, Best, thou always seek’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To glorify thy Son; I always thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is most just. This I my glory account,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My exaltation, and my whole delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou in me well pleased declar’st thy will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fulfilled, which to fulfil is all my bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sceptre and power, thy giving, I assume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gladlier shall resign, when in the end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt be all in all, and I in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever, and in me all whom thou lov’st:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But whom thou hat’st I hate, and can put on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy terrors, as I put thy mildness on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Image of thee in all things; and shall soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Armed with thy might, rid Heaven of these rebelled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To their prepared ill mansion driven down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To chains of darkness and the undying worm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from thy just obedience could revolt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom to obey is happiness entire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shall thy Saints, unmixed, and from the impure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far separate, circling thy holy mount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfeigned halleluiahs to thee sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hymns of high praise, and I among them chief.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So said, he, o’er his sceptre bowing, rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the right hand of Glory where he sat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the third sacred morn began to shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dawning through Heaven. Forth rushed with whirlwind sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chariot of Paternal Deity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flashing thick flames, wheel within wheel, undrawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Itself instinct with spirit, but convoyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By four Cherubic shapes. Four faces each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had wondrous; as with stars, their bodies all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wings were set with eyes; with eyes the wheels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beryl, and careering fires between;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over their heads a crystal firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereon a sapphire throne, inlaid with pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amber and colours of the showery arch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, in celestial panoply all armed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of radiant Urim, work divinely wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ascended; at his right hand Victory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat eagle-winged; beside him hung his bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quiver with three-bolted thunder stored;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from about him fierce effusion rolled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of smoke, and bickering flame, and sparkles dire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He onward came; far off his coming shone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twenty thousand (I their number heard)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chariots of God, half on each hand, were seen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He on the wings of Cherub rode sublime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the crystalline sky, in sapphire throned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illustrious far and wide, but by his own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First seen; them unexpected joy surprised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the great ensign of Messiah blazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aloft by Angels borne, his sign in Heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under whose conduct Michael soon reduced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His army, circumfused on either wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under their Head embodied all in one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before him Power Divine his way prepared;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At his command the uprooted hills retired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each to his place; they heard his voice, and went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obsequious; Heaven his wonted face renewed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with fresh flowerets hill and valley smiled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This saw his hapless foes, but stood obdured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to rebellious fight rallied their powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insensate, hope conceiving from despair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heavenly Spirits could such perverseness dwell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to convince the proud what signs avail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or wonders move the obdurate to relent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They, hardened more by what might most reclaim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grieving to see his glory, at the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took envy, and, aspiring to his highth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood re-embattled fierce, by force or fraud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weening to prosper, and at length prevail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against God and Messiah, or to fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In universal ruin last; and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To final battle drew, disdaining flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or faint retreat: when the great Son of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all his host on either hand thus spake:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Stand still in bright array, ye Saints; here stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye Angels armed; this day from battle rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faithful hath been your warfare, and of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accepted, fearless in his righteous cause;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as ye have received, so have ye done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invincibly. But of this cursed crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The punishment to other hand belongs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Number to this day’s work is not ordained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor multitude; stand only and behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God’s indignation on these godless poured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By me; not you, but me, they have despised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet envied; against me is all their rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the Father, to whom in Heaven supreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kingdom and power and glory appertains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath honoured me, according to his will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore to me their doom he hath assigned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they may have their wish, to try with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In battle which the stronger proves⁠—they all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I alone against them; since by strength</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They measure all, of other excellence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not emulous, nor care who them excels;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor other strife with them do I vouchsafe.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So spake the Son, and into terror changed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His countenance, too severe to be beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of wrath bent on his enemies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once the Four spread out their starry wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dreadful shade contiguous, and the orbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his fierce chariot rolled, as with the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of torrent floods, or of a numerous host.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He on his impious foes right onward drove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gloomy as night; under his burning wheels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The steadfast Empyrean shook throughout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All but the throne itself of God. Full soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among them he arrived, in his right hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grasping ten thousand thunders, which he sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before him, such as in their souls infixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plagues; they, astonished, all resistance lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All courage; down their idle weapons dropt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er shields, and helms, and helmed heads he rode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wished the mountains now might be again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrown on them, as a shelter from his ire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor less on either side tempestuous fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His arrows, from the fourfold-visaged Four,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distinct with eyes, and from the living wheels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distinct alike with multitude of eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One spirit in them ruled, and every eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glared lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the accursed, that withered all their strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of their wonted vigour left them drained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His thunder in mid-volley; for he meant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to destroy, but root them out of Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The overthrown he raised, and, as a herd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of goats or timorous flock together thronged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drove them before him thunderstruck, pursued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With terrors and with furies to the bounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crystal wall of Heaven; which, opening wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rolled inward, and a spacious gap disclosed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the wasteful deep. The monstrous sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strook them with horror backward, but far worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Urged them behind; headlong themselves they threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down from the verge of Heaven; eternal wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burned after them to the bottomless pit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hell heard the unsuflerable noise; Hell saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven ruining from Heaven, and would have fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine days they fell; confounded Chaos roared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And felt tenfold confusion in their fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through his wild anarchy; so huge a rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encumbered him with ruin. Hell at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yawning, received them whole, and on them closed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hell, their fit habitation, fraught with fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disburdened Heaven rejoiced, and soon repaired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her mural breach, returning whence it rolled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sole victor, from the expulsion of his foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Messiah his triumphal chariot turned.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eye-witnesses of his almighty acts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With jubilee advanced; and as they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shaded with branching palm, each order bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sung triumph, and him sung victorious King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son, Heir, and Lord, to him dominion given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worthiest to reign. He, celebrated, rode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Triumphant through mid Heaven, into the courts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And temple of his mighty Father throned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On high; who into glory him received,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus, measuring things in Heaven by things on Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At thy request, and that thou may’st beware</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By what is past, to thee I have revealed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What might have else to human race been hid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The discord which befell, and war in Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the angelic powers, and the deep fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those too high aspiring, who rebelled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Satan: he who envies now thy state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who now is plotting how he may seduce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee also from obedience, that, with him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bereaved of happiness, thou may’st partake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His punishment, eternal misery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which would be all his solace and revenge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a despite done against the Most High,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee once to gain companion of his woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But listen not to his temptations; warn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By terrible example, the reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of disobedience. Firm they might have stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
