<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Meanwhile the hainous and despightfull act</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Satan done in Paradise, and how</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hee in the Serpent had perverted Eve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her Husband shee, to taste the fatall fruit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was known in Heav’n; for what can scape the Eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of God All-seeing, or deceave his Heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Omniscient, who in all things wise and just,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hinder’d not Satan to attempt the minde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Man, with strength entire, and free Will arm’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Complete to have discover’d and repulst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whatever wiles of Foe or seeming Friend.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For still they knew, and ought to have still remember’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The high Injunction not to taste that Fruit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whoever tempted; which they not obeying,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Incurr’d, what could they less, the penaltie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And manifold in sin, deserv’d to fall.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up into Heav’n from Paradise in hast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Angelic Guards ascended, mute and sad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Man, for of his state by this they knew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much wondring how the suttle Fiend had stoln</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Entrance unseen. Soon as th’ unwelcome news</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Earth arriv’d at Heaven Gate, displeas’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That time Celestial visages, yet mixt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With pitie, violated not thir bliss.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About the new-arriv’d, in multitudes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ ethereal People ran, to hear and know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How all befell: they towards the Throne Supream</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accountable made haste to make appear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With righteous plea, thir utmost vigilance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And easily approv’d; when the most High</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eternal Father from his secret Cloud,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amidst in Thunder utter’d thus his voice.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Assembl’d Angels, and ye Powers return’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From unsuccessful charge, be not dismaid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor troubl’d at these tidings from the Earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which your sincerest care could not prevent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Foretold so lately what would come to pass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When first this Tempter cross’d the Gulf from Hell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I told ye then he should prevail and speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On his bad Errand, Man should be seduc’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And flatter’d out of all, believing lies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against his Maker; no Decree of mine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Concurring to necessitate his Fall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or touch with lightest moment of impulse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His free Will, to her own inclining left</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In eevn scale. But fall’n he is, and now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What rests, but that the mortal Sentence pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On his transgression, Death denounc’t that day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which he presumes already vain and void,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because not yet inflicted, as he fear’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By some immediate stroak; but soon shall find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forbearance no acquittance ere day end.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Justice shall not return as bountie scorn’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferr’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Judgement, whether in Heav’n, or Earth; or Hell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Easie it may be seen that I intend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mercie collegue with Justice, sending thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mans Friend, his Mediator, his design’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntarie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And destin’d Man himself to judge Man fall’n.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake the Father, and unfoulding bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Toward the right hand his Glorie, on the Son</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blaz’d forth unclouded Deitie; he full</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resplendent all his Father manifest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Express’d, and thus divinely answer’d milde.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Father Eternal, thine is to decree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mine both in Heav’n and Earth to do thy will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Supream, that thou in mee thy Son belov’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mayst ever rest well pleas’d. I go to judge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou knowst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whoever judg’d, the worst on mee must light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When time shall be, for so I undertook</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before thee; and not repenting, this obtaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of right, that I may mitigate thir doom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On me deriv’d, yet I shall temper so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Justice with Mercie, as may illustrate most</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Attendance none shall need, nor Train, where none</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are to behold the Judgement, but the judg’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those two; the third best absent is condemn’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conviction to the Serpent none belongs.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus saying, from his radiant Seat he rose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of high collateral glorie: him Thrones and Powers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eden and all the Coast in prospect lay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes wing’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now was the Sun in Western cadence low</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Noon, and gentle Aires due at thir hour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fan the Earth now wak’d, and usher in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Eevning coole when he from wrauth more coole</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Came the mild Judge and Intercessor both</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sentence Man: the voice of God they heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now walking in the Garden, by soft windes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brought to thir Ears, while day declin’d, they heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from his presence hid themselves among</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The thickest Trees, both Man and Wife, till God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Approaching, thus to Adam call’d aloud.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Where art thou Adam, wont with joy to meet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My coming seen far off? I miss thee here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not pleas’d, thus entertaind with solitude,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where obvious dutie erewhile appear’d unsaught:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or come I less conspicuous, or what change</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He came, and with him Eve, more loth, though first</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To offend, discount’nanc’t both, and discompos’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love was not in thir looks, either to God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or to each other, but apparent guilt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shame, and perturbation, and despaire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Anger, and obstinacie, and hate, and guile.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whence Adam faultring long, thus answer’d brief.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Affraid, being naked, hid my self. To whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The gracious Judge without revile repli’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not fear’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But still rejoyc’t, how is it now become</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath told thee? hast thou eaten of the Tree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus Adam sore beset repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Heav’n! in evil strait this day I stand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before my Judge, either to undergoe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My self the total Crime, or to accuse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My other self, the partner of my life;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose failing, while her Faith to me remaines,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I should conceal, and not expose to blame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By my complaint; but strict necessitie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Subdues me, and calamitous constraint,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Least on my head both sin and punishment,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>However insupportable, be all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Devolv’d; though should I hold my peace, yet thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wouldst easily detect what I conceale.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Woman whom thou mad’st to be my help,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gav’st me as thy perfet gift, so good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So fit, so acceptable, so Divine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That from her hand I could suspect no ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what she did, whatever in it self,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her doing seem’d to justifie the deed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shee gave me of the Tree, and I did eate.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom the sovran Presence thus repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was shee thy God, that her thou didst obey</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before his voice, or was shee made thy guide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Superior, or but equal, that to her</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou did’st resigne thy Manhood, and the Place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for thee, whose perfection farr excell’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hers in all real dignitie: Adornd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She was indeed, and lovely to attract</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy Love, not thy Subjection, and her Gifts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were such as under Government well seem’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unseemly to beare rule, which was thy part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And person, had’st thou known thy self aright.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So having said, he thus to Eve in few:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Say Woman, what is this which thou hast done?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom sad Eve with shame nigh overwhelm’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bold or loquacious, thus abasht repli’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Serpent me beguil’d and I did eate.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Which when the Lord God heard, without delay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Judgement he proceeded on th’ accus’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Serpent though brute, unable to transferre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Guilt on him who made him instrument</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of mischief, and polluted from the end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his Creation; justly then accurst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As vitiated in Nature: more to know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Concern’d not Man (since he no further knew)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor alter’d his offence; yet God at last</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Satan first in sin his doom apply’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though in mysterious terms, judg’d as then best:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Because thou hast done this, thou art accurst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above all Cattel, each Beast of the Field;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon thy Belly groveling thou shalt goe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dust shalt eat all the days of thy Life.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Between Thee and the Woman I will put</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enmitie, and between thine and her Seed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her Seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake this Oracle, then verifi’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Jesus son of Mary second Eve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heav’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prince of the Aire; then rising from his Grave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spoild Principalities and Powers, triumpht</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In open shew, and with ascention bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Captivity led captive through the Aire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Realme it self of Satan long usurpt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom he shall tread at last under our feet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eevn hee who now foretold his fatal bruise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the Woman thus his Sentence turn’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thy sorrow I will greatly multiplie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By thy Conception; Children thou shalt bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thine shall submit, hee over thee shall rule.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>On Adam last thus judgement he pronounc’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because thou hast heark’nd to the voice of thy Wife,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eaten of the Tree concerning which</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I charg’d thee, saying: Thou shalt not eate thereof,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Curs’d is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shalt eate thereof all the days of thy Life;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thornes also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unbid, and thou shalt eate th’ Herb of th’ Field,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the sweat of thy Face shalt thou eate Bread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till thou return unto the ground, for thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of the ground wast taken, know thy Birth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For dust thou art, and shalt to dust returne.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So judg’d he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And th’ instant stroke of Death denounc’t that day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Remov’d farr off; then pittying how they stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before him naked to the aire, that now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must suffer change, disdain’d not to begin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thenceforth the forme of servant to assume,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As when he wash’d his servants feet, so now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Father of his Familie he clad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or slain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or as the Snake with youthful Coate repaid;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thought not much to cloath his Enemies:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor hee thir outward onely with the Skins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Beasts, but inward nakedness, much more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteousness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Araying cover’d from his Fathers sight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To him with swift ascent he up returnd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into his blissful bosom reassum’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In glory as of old, to him appeas’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All, though all-knowing, what had past with Man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meanwhile ere thus was sin’d and judg’d on Earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within the Gates of Hell sate Sin and Death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In counterview within the Gates, that now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farr into Chaos, since the Fiend pass’d through,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sin opening, who thus now to Death began.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O Son, why sit we here each other viewing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Idlely, while Satan our great Author thrives</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For us his ofspring deare? It cannot be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that success attends him; if mishap,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere this he had return’d, with fury driv’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By his Avenger, since no place like this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wings growing, and Dominion giv’n me large</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond this Deep; whatever drawes me on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or sympathie, or som connatural force</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Powerful at greatest distance to unite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With secret amity things of like kinde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By secretest conveyance. Thou my Shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inseparable must with mee along:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Death from Sin no power can separate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But least the difficultie of passing back</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stay his returne perhaps over this Gulfe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impassable, impervious, let us try</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Adventrous work, yet to thy power and mine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not unagreeable, to found a path</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over this Maine from Hell to that new World</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where Satan now prevailes, a Monument</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of merit high to all th’ infernal Host,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Easing thir passage hence, for intercourse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or transmigration, as thir lot shall lead.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By this new felt attraction and instinct.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Whom thus the meager Shadow answerd soon.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Goe whither Fate and inclination strong</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leads thee, I shall not lag behinde, nor erre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The way, thou leading, such a sent I draw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The savour of Death from all things there that live:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So saying, with delight he snuff’d the smell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of mortal change on Earth. As when a flock</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of ravenous Fowl, though many a League remote,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against the day of Battel, to a Field,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where Armies lie encampt, come flying, lur’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With sent of living Carcasses design’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For death, the following day, in bloodie fight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So sented the grim Feature, and upturn’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Nostril wide into the murkie Air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sagacious of his Quarrey from so farr.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then Both from out Hell Gates into the waste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wide Anarchie of Chaos damp and dark</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flew divers, &amp; with Power (thir Power was great)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hovering upon the Waters; what they met</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Solid or slimie, as in raging Sea</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tost up and down, together crowded drove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As when two Polar Winds blowing adverse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the Cronian Sea, together drive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mountains of Ice, that stop th’ imagin’d way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond Petsora Eastward, to the rich</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cathaian Coast. The aggregated Soyle</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Death with his Mace petrific, cold and dry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As with a Trident smote, and fix’t as firm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Delos floating once; the rest his look</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bound with Gorgonian rigor not to move,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with Asphaltic slime; broad as the Gate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deep to the Roots of Hell the gather’d beach</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They fasten’d, and the Mole immense wraught on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over the foaming deep high Archt, a Bridge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of length prodigious joyning to the Wall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Immoveable of this now fenceless world</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smooth, easie, inoffensive down to Hell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So, if great things to small may be compar’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Xerxes, the Libertie of Greece to yoke,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Susa his Memnonian Palace high</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Came to the Sea, and over Hellespont</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joyn’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And scourg’d with many a stroak th’ indignant waves.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now had they brought the work by wondrous Art</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pontifical, a ridge of pendent Rock</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over the vext Abyss, following the track</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Satan, to the selfsame place where hee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First lighted from his Wing, and landed safe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From out of Chaos to the outside bare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of this round World: with Pinns of Adamant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Chains they made all fast, too fast they made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And durable; and now in little space</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Confines met of Empyrean Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of this World, and on the left hand Hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With long reach interpos’d; three sev’ral wayes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In sight, to each of these three places led.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now thir way to Earth they had descri’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Paradise first tending, when behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Satan in likeness of an Angel bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Betwixt the Centaure and the Scorpion stearing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Zenith, while the Sun in Aries rose:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disguis’d he came, but those his Children dear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir Parent soon discern’d, though in disguise.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hee, after Eve seduc’t, unminded slunk</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the Wood fast by, and changing shape</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Eve, though all unweeting, seconded</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon her Husband, saw thir shame that sought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vain covertures; but when he saw descend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Son of God to judge them, terrifi’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hee fled, not hoping to escape, but shun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The present, fearing guiltie what his wrauth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Might suddenly inflict; that past, return’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Night, and listning where the hapless Paire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sate in thir sad discourse, and various plaint,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thence gatherd his own doom, which understood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not instant, but of future time. With joy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tidings fraught, to Hell he now return’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And at the brink of Chaos, neer the foot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of this new wondrous Pontifice, unhop’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Met who to meet him came, his Ofspring dear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great joy was at thir meeting, and at sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of that stupendious Bridge his joy encreas’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long hee admiring stood, till Sin, his faire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inchanting Daughter, thus the silence broke.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O Parent, these are thy magnific deeds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy Trophies, which thou view’st as not thine own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou art thir Author and prime Architect:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For I no sooner in my Heart divin’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Heart, which by a secret harmonie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still moves with thine, joyn’d in connexion sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thou on Earth hadst prosper’d, which thy looks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now also evidence, but straight I felt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though distant from thee Worlds between, yet felt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I must after thee with this thy Son;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such fatal consequence unites us three:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obscure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Detain from following thy illustrious track.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hast atchiev’d our libertie, confin’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within Hell Gates till now, thou us impow’rd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fortifie thus farr, and overlay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With this portentous Bridge the dark Abyss.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thine now is all this World, thy vertue hath won</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What thy hands builded not, thy Wisdom gain’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With odds what Warr hath lost, and fully aveng’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our foile in Heav’n; here thou shalt Monarch reign,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There didst not; there let him still Victor sway,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Battel hath adjudg’d, from this new World</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Retiring, by his own doom alienated,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And henceforth Monarchie with thee divide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all things, parted by th’ Empyreal bounds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or trie thee now more dang’rous to his Throne.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Whom thus the Prince of Darkness answerd glad.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>High proof ye now have giv’n to be the Race</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Satan (for I glorie in the name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Antagonist of Heav’ns Almightie King)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amply have merited of me, of all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Infernal Empire, that so neer Heav’ns dore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Triumphal with triumphal act have met,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mine with this glorious Work, &amp; made one Realm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of easie thorough-fare. Therefore while I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Descend through Darkness, on your Rode with ease</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To my associate Powers, them to acquaint</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With these successes, and with them rejoyce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You two this way, among those numerous Orbs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All yours, right down to Paradise descend;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There dwell &amp; Reign in bliss, thence on the Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dominion exercise and in the Aire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chiefly on Man, sole Lord of all declar’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Substitutes I send ye, and Create</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Plenipotent on Earth, of matchless might</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Issuing from mee: on your joynt vigor now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My hold of this new Kingdom all depends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through Sin to Death expos’d by my exploit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If your joynt power prevaile, th’ affaires of Hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No detriment need feare, goe and be strong.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So saying he dismiss’d them, they with speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir course through thickest Constellations held</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spreading thir bane; the blasted Starrs lookt wan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Planets, Planet-strook, real Eclips</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then sufferd. Th’ other way Satan went down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Causey to Hell Gate; on either side</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disparted Chaos over built exclaimd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with rebounding surge the barrs assaild,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That scorn’d his indignation: through the Gate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wide open and unguarded, Satan pass’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all about found desolate; for those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Appointed to sit there, had left thir charge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flown to the upper World; the rest were all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farr to the inland retir’d, about the walls</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Pandemonium, Citie and proud seate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Lucifer, so by allusion calld,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of that bright Starr to Satan paragond.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There kept thir Watch the Legions, while the Grand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Council sate, sollicitous what chance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Might intercept thir Emperour sent, so hee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Departing gave command, and they observ’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As when the Tartar from his Russian Foe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Astracan over the Snowie Plaines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Retires, or Bactrian Sophi from the hornes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Turkish Crescent, leaves all waste beyond</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Realme of Aladule, in his retreate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Tauris or Casbeen. So these the late</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heav’n-banisht Host, left desert utmost Hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Many a dark League, reduc’t in careful Watch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Round thir Metropolis, and now expecting</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each hour their great adventurer from the search</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Forrein Worlds: he through the midst unmarkt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In shew plebeian Angel militant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of lowest order, past; and from the dore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of that Plutonian Hall, invisible</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ascended his high Throne, which under state</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of richest texture spred, at th’ upper end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was plac’t in regal lustre. Down a while</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He sate, and round about him saw unseen:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At last as from a Cloud his fulgent head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shape Starr bright appeer’d, or brighter, clad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With what permissive glory since his fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was left him, or false glitter: All amaz’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bent thir aspect, and whom they wish’d beheld,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir mighty Chief returnd: loud was th’ acclaime:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forth rush’d in haste the great consulting Peers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rais’d from thir dark Divan, and with like joy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Congratulant approach’d him, who with hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Silence, and with these words attention won.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For in possession such, not onely of right,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I call ye and declare ye now, returnd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Triumphant out of this infernal Pit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Abominable, accurst, the house of woe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Dungeon of our Tyrant: Now possess,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Lords, a spacious World, to our native Heaven</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Little inferiour, by my adventure hard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With peril great atchiev’d. Long were to tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What I have don, what sufferd, with what paine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Voyag’d the unreal, vast, unbounded deep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of horrible confusion, over which</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Sin and Death a broad way now is pav’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To expedite your glorious march; but I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Toild out my uncouth passage, forc’t to ride</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ untractable Abysse, plung’d in the womb</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wilde,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That jealous of thir secrets fiercely oppos’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My journey strange, with clamorous uproare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Protesting Fate supreame; thence how I found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The new created World, which fame in Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long had foretold, a Fabrick wonderful</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of absolute perfection, therein Man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Plac’t in a Paradise, by our exile</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made happie: Him by fraud I have seduc’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From his Creator, and the more to increase</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your wonder, with an Apple; he thereat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Offended, worth your laughter, hath giv’n up</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both his beloved Man and all his World,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without our hazard, labour or allarme,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To range in, and to dwell, and over Man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To rule, as over all he should have rul’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>True is, mee also he hath judg’d, or rather</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mee not, but the brute Serpent in whose shape</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man I deceav’d: that which to mee belongs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is enmity, which he will put between</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mee and Mankinde; I am to bruise his heel;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A World who would not purchase with a bruise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or much more grievous pain? Ye have th’ account</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of my performance: What remaines, ye Gods,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But up and enter now into full bliss.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So having said, a while he stood, expecting</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir universal shout and high applause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fill his eare, when contrary he hears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On all sides, from innumerable tongues</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A dismal universal hiss, the sound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of public scorn; he wonderd, but not long</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had leasure, wondring at himself now more;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Armes clung to his Ribs, his Leggs entwining</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each other, till supplanted down he fell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A monstrous Serpent on his Belly prone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reluctant, but in vaine, a greater power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now rul’d him, punisht in the shape he sin’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>According to his doom: he would have spoke,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But hiss for hiss returnd with forked tongue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To forked tongue, for now were all transform’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alike, to Serpents all as accessories</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To his bold Riot: dreadful was the din</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of hissing through the Hall, thick swarming now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With complicated monsters, head and taile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scorpion and Asp, and Amphisbaena dire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cerastes hornd, Hydrus, and Ellops drear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Dipsas (Not so thick swarm’d once the Soil</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the Isle</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ophiusa) but still greatest hee the midst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now Dragon grown, larger then whom the Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ingenderd in the Pythian Vale on slime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Huge Python, and his Power no less he seem’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above the rest still to retain; they all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him follow’d issuing forth to th’ open Field,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where all yet left of that revolted Rout</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heav’n-fall’n, in station stood or just array,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sublime with expectation when to see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Triumph issuing forth thir glorious Chief;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of ugly Serpents; horror on them fell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And horrid sympathie; for what they saw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They felt themselvs now changing; down thir arms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down fell both Spear and Shield, down they as fast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the dire hiss renew’d, and the dire form</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Catcht by Contagion, like in punishment,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As in thir crime. Thus was th’ applause they meant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Turnd to exploding hiss, triumph to shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cast on themselves from thir own mouths. There stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Grove hard by, sprung up with this thir change,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His will who reigns above, to aggravate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir penance, laden with fair Fruit, like that</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVhich grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Us’d by the Tempter: on that prospect strange</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir earnest eyes they fix’d, imagining</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For one forbidden Tree a multitude</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now ris’n, to work them furder woe or shame;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet parcht with scalding thurst and hunger fierce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though to delude them sent, could not abstain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But on they rould in heaps, and up the Trees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Climbing, sat thicker then the snakie locks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That curld Megaera: greedily they pluck’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Frutage fair to sight, like that which grew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neer that bituminous Lake where Sodom flam’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This more delusive, not the touch, but taste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deceav’d; they fondly thinking to allay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir appetite with gust, instead of Fruit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chewd bitter Ashes, which th’ offended taste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVith spattering noise rejected: oft they assayd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hunger and thirst constraining, drugd as oft,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVith hatefullest disrelish writh’d thir jaws</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVith foot and cinders fill’d; so oft they fell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the same illusion, not as Man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom they triumph’d once lapst. Thus were they plagu’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And worn with Famin, long and ceasless hiss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till thir lost shape, permitted, they resum’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yearly enjoynd, some say, to undergo</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This annual humbling certain number’d days,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To dash thir pride, and joy for Man seduc’t.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>However some tradition they dispers’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the Heathen of thir purchase got,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Fabl’d how the Serpent, whom they calld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ophion with Eurynome, the wide-</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driv’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Ops, ere yet Dictaean Jove was born.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too soon arriv’d, Sin there in power before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Once actual, now in body, and to dwell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Habitual habitant; behind her Death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On his pale Horse: to whom Sin thus began.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Second of Satan sprung, all conquering Death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What thinkst thou of our Empire now, though earnd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With travail difficult, not better farr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then stil at Hels dark threshold to have sate watch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unnam’d, undreaded, and thy self half starv’d?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Whom thus the Sin-born Monster answerd soon.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mee, who with eternal Famin pine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There best, where most with ravin I may meet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To stuff this Maw, this vast unhide-bound Corps.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom th’ incestuous Mother thus repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou therefore on these Herbs, and Fruits, &amp; Flours</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Feed first, on each Beast next, and Fish, and Fowle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No homely morsels, and whatever thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Sithe of Time mowes down, devour unspar’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till I in Man residing through the Race,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And season him thy last and sweetest prey.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said, they both betook them several wayes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both to destroy, or unimmortal make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All kinds, and for destruction to mature</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sooner or later; which th’ Almightie seeing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From his transcendent Seat the Saints among,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To those bright Orders utterd thus his voice.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>See with what heat these Dogs of Hell advance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To waste and havoc yonder VVorld, which I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So fair and good created, and had still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kept in that state, had not the folly of Man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let in these wastful Furies, who impute</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Folly to mee, so doth the Prince of Hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And his Adherents, that with so much ease</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I suffer them to enter and possess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A place so heav’nly, and conniving seem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To gratifie my scornful Enemies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That laugh, as if transported with some fit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Passion, I to them had quitted all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At random yeilded up to their misrule;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And know not that I call’d and drew them thither</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which mans polluting Sin with taint hath shed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On what was pure, till cramm’d and gorg’d, nigh burst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With suckt and glutted offal, at one fling</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleasing Son,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave at last</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through Chaos hurld, obstruct the mouth of Hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ever, and seal up his ravenous Jawes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then Heav’n and Earth renewd shall be made pure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sanctitie that shall receive no staine:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till then the Curse pronounc’t on both precedes.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Hee ended, and the heav’nly Audience loud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sung Halleluia, as the sound of Seas,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through multitude that sung: Just are thy ways,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Righteous are thy Decrees on all thy Works;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Destin’d restorer of Mankind, by whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>New Heav’n and Earth shall to the Ages rise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or down from Heav’n descend. Such was thir song,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While the Creator calling forth by name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His mightie Angels gave them several charge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As sorted best with present things. The Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had first his precept so to move, so shine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As might affect the Earth with cold and heat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scarce tollerable, and from the North to call</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Solstitial summers heat. To the blanc Moone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her office they prescrib’d, to th’ other five</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir planetarie motions and aspects</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Sextile, Square, and Trine, and Opposite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of noxious efficacie, and when to joyne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Synod unbenigne, and taught the fixt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir influence malignant when to showre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which of them rising with the Sun, or falling,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should prove tempestuous: To the Winds they set</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir corners, when with bluster to confound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sea, Aire, and Shoar, the Thunder when to rowle</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With terror through the dark Aereal Hall.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some say he bid his Angels turne ascanse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From the Suns Axle; they with labour push’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oblique the Centric Globe: Som say the Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was bid turn Reines from th’ Equinoctial Rode</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like distant breadth to Taurus with the Seav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Atlantick Sisters, and the Spartan Twins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up to the Tropic Crab; thence down amaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Leo and the Virgin and the Scales,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As deep as Capricorne, to bring in change</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Seasons to each Clime; else had the Spring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perpetual smil’d on Earth with vernant Flours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Equal in Days and Nights, except to those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had unbenighted shon, while the low Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To recompence his distance, in thir sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had rounded still th’ Horizon, and not known</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or East or West, which had forbid the Snow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From cold Estotiland, and South as farr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath Magellan. At that tasted Fruit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Sun, as from Thyestean Banquet, turn’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His course intended; else how had the World</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inhabited, though sinless, more then now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Avoided pinching cold and scorching heate?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These changes in the Heav’ns, though slow, produc’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like change on Sea and Land, sideral blast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vapour, and Mist, and Exhalation hot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corrupt and Pestilent: Now from the North</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shoar</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bursting thir brazen Dungeon, armd with ice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And snow and haile and stormie gust and flaw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Boreas and Caecias and Argestes loud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Thrascias rend the Woods and Seas upturn;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With adverse blast up-turns them from the South</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Notus and Afer black with thundrous Clouds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Serraliona; thwart of these as fierce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent VVindes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eurus and Zephir with thir lateral noise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sirocco, and Libecchio. Thus began</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Outrage from liveless things; but Discord first</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Daughter of Sin, among th’ irrational,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Death introduc’d through fierce antipathie:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beast now with Beast gan war, &amp; Fowle with Fowle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Fish with Fish; to graze the Herb all leaving,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Devourd each other; nor stood much in awe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Man, but fled him, or with count’nance grim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glar’d on him passing: these were from without</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The growing miseries, which Adam saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alreadie in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sorrow abandond, but worse felt within,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in a troubl’d Sea of passion tost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus to disburd’n sought with sad complaint.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O miserable of happie! is this the end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of this new glorious World, and mee so late</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Glory of that Glory, who now becom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accurst of blessed, hide me from the face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of God, whom to behold was then my highth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of happiness: yet well, if here would end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The miserie, I deserv’d it, and would beare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My own deservings; but this will not serve;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All that I eate or drink, or shall beget,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is propagated curse. O voice once heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Delightfully, Encrease and Multiply,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now death to heare! for what can I encrease</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or multiplie, but curses on my head?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The evil on him brought by me, will curse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Head, Ill fare our Ancestor impure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For this we may thank Adam; but his thanks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall be the execration; so besides</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mine own that bide upon me, all from mee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall with a fierce reflux on mee redound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On mee as on thir natural center light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heavie, though in thir place. O fleeting joyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Paradise, deare bought with lasting woes!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mould me Man, did I sollicite thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From darkness to promote me, or here place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this delicious Garden? as my Will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Concurd not to my being, it were but right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And equal to reduce me to my dust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Desirous to resigne, and render back</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All I receav’d, unable to performe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The good I sought not. To the loss of that,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sufficient penaltie, why hast thou added</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sense of endless woes? inexplicable</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy Justice seems; yet to say truth, too late,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I thus contest; then should have been refusd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those terms whatever, when they were propos’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou didst accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then cavil the conditions? and though God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prove disobedient, and reprov’d, retort,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherefore didst thou beget me? I sought it not:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wouldst thou admit for his contempt of thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That proud excuse? yet him not thy election,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Natural necessity begot.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God made thee of choice his own, and of his own</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To serve him, thy reward was of his grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy punishment then justly is at his Will.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That dust I am, and shall to dust returne:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O welcom hour whenever! why delayes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His hand to execute what his Decree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fixd on this day? why do I overlive,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why am I mockt with death, and length’nd out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mortalitie my sentence, and be Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Insensible, how glad would lay me down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As in my Mothers lap? there I should rest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mee and to my ofspring would torment me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pursues me still, least all I cannot die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which God inspir’d, cannot together perish</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or in some other dismal place, who knows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I shall die a living Death? O thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Life that sinn’d; what dies but what had life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sin? the Bodie properly hath neither.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All of me then shall die: let this appease</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The doubt, since humane reach no further knows.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though the Lord of all be infinite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is his wrauth also? be it, man is not so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But mortal doom’d. How can he exercise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can he make deathless Death? that were to make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strange contradiction, which to God himself</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impossible is held, as Argument</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of weakness, not of Power. Will he, draw out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For angers sake, finite to infinite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In punisht man, to satisfie his rigour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Satisfi’d never; that were to extend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By which all Causes else according still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the reception of thir matter act,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to th’ extent of thir own Spheare. But say</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Death be not one stroak, as I suppos’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bereaving sense, but endless miserie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From this day onward, which I feel begun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both in me, and without me, and so last</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To perpetuitie; Ay me, that fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Comes thundring back with dreadful revolution</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On my defensless head; both Death and I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Am found Eternal, and incorporate both,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor I on my part single, in mee all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Posteritie stands curst: Fair Patrimonie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I must leave ye, Sons; O were I able</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To waste it all my self, and leave ye none!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So disinherited how would ye bless</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Me now your Curse! Ah, why should all mankind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For one mans fault thus guiltless be condemn’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If guiltless? But from mee what can proceed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But all corrupt, both Mind and Will deprav’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to do onely, but to will the same</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With me? how can they acquitted stand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In sight of God? Him after all Disputes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forc’t I absolve: all my evasions vain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And reasonings, though through Mazes, lead me still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to my own conviction: first and last</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On mee, mee onely, as the sourse and spring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all corruption, all the blame lights due;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So might the wrauth, Fond wish! couldst thou support</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That burden heavier then the Earth to bear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then all the world much heavier, though divided</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With that bad Woman? Thus what thou desir’st,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what thou fearst, alike destroyes all hope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond all past example and future,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Satan onely like both crime and doom.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Conscience, into what Abyss of fears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And horrors hast thou driv’n me; out of which</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I find no way, from deep to deeper plung’d!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus Adam to himself lamented loud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through the still Night, now now, as ere man fell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wholsom and cool, and mild, but with black Air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which to his evil Conscience represented</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All things with double terror: On the ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Outstretcht he lay, on the cold ground, and oft</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Curs’d his Creation, Death as oft accus’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of tardie execution, since denounc’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The day of his offence. Why comes not Death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Said hee, with one thrice acceptable stroke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Justice Divine not hast’n to be just?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Death comes not at call, Justice Divine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Woods, O Fountains, Hillocks, Dales and Bowrs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVith other echo farr I taught your Shades</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To answer, and resound farr other Song.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVhom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Desolate where she sate, approaching nigh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soft words to his fierce passion she assay’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But her with stern regard he thus repell’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Out of my sight, thou Serpent, that name best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Befits thee with him leagu’d, thy self as false</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like his, and colour Serpentine may shew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Henceforth; least that too heav’nly form, pretended</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hellish falshood, snare them. But for thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I had persisted happie, had not thy pride</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wandring vanitie, when lest was safe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rejected my forewarning, and disdain’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to be trusted, longing to be seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though by the Devil himself, him overweening</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To over-reach, but with the Serpent meeting</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fool’d and beguil’d, by him thou, I by thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To trust thee from my side, imagin’d wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Constant, mature, proof against all assaults,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And understood not all was but a shew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rather then solid vertu, all but a Rib</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More to the part sinister from me drawn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well if thrown out, as supernumerarie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To my just number found. O why did God,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Creator wise, that peopl’d highest Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Spirits Masculine, create at last</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This noveltie on Earth, this fair defect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Nature, and not fill the World at once</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Men as Angels without Feminine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or find some other way to generate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mankind? this mischief had not then befall’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And more that shall befall, innumerable</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disturbances on Earth through Femal snares,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And straight conjunction with this Sex: for either</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He never shall find out fit Mate, but such</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As some misfortune brings him, or mistake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through her perverseness, but shall see her gaind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By a farr worse, or if she love, withheld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Parents, or his happiest choice too late</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall meet, alreadie linkt and Wedlock-bound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To a fell Adversarie, his hate or shame:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which infinite calamitie shall cause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To humane life, and houshold peace confound.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He added not, and from her turn’d, but Eve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not so repulst, with Tears that ceas’d not flowing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tresses all disorderd, at his feet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fell humble, and imbracing them, besaught</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Forsake me not thus, Adam, witness Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What love sincere, and reverence in my heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I beare thee, and unweeting have offended,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unhappilie deceav’d; thy suppliant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy counsel in this uttermost distress,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My onely strength and stay: forlorn of thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While yet we live, scarse one short hour perhaps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Between us two let there be peace, both joyning,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As joyn’d in injuries, one enmitie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against a Foe by doom express assign’d us,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That cruel Serpent: On me exercise not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy hatred for this miserie befall’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On me already lost, mee then thy self</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More miserable; both have sin’d, but thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against God onely, I against God and thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the place of judgement will return,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There with my cries importune Heaven, that all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sentence from thy head remov’d may light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mee mee onely just object of his ire.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>She ended weeping, and her lowlie plight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Immoveable till peace obtain’d from fault</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Acknowledg’d and deplor’d, in Adam wraught</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Commiseration; soon his heart relented</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Towards her, his life so late and sole delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now at his feet submissive in distress,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Creature so faire his reconcilement seeking,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His counsel whom she had displeas’d, his aide;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As one disarm’d, his anger all he lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus with peaceful words uprais’d her soon.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Unwarie, and too desirous, as before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So now of what thou knowst not, who desir’st</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The punishment all on thy self; alas,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beare thine own first, ill able to sustaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His full wrauth whose thou feelst as yet lest part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And my displeasure bearst so ill. If Prayers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could alter high Decrees, I to that place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That on my head all might be visited,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy frailtie and infirmer Sex forgiv’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To me committed and by me expos’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But rise, let us no more contend, nor blame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each other, blam’d enough elsewhere, but strive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In offices of Love, how we may light’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each others burden in our share of woe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since this days Death denounc’t, if ought I see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will prove no sudden, but a slow-pac’t evill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A long days dying to augment our paine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to our Seed (O hapless Seed!) deriv’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Adam, by sad experiment I know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How little weight my words with thee can finde,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Found so erroneous, thence by just event</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Found so unfortunate; nevertheless,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Restor’d by thee, vile as I am, to place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of new acceptance, hopeful to regaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy Love, the sole contentment of my heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Living or dying from thee I will not hide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What thoughts in my unquiet brest are ris’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tending to som relief of our extremes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As in our evils, and of easier choice.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If care of our descent perplex us most,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which must be born to certain woe, devourd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Death at last, and miserable it is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be to others cause of misery,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our own begotten, and of our Loines to bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into this cursed World a woful Race,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That after wretched Life must be at last</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Food for so foule a Monster, in thy power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It lies, yet ere Conception to prevent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Race unblest, to being yet unbegot.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Childless thou art, Childless remaine:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So Death shall be deceav’d his glut, and with us two</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be forc’d to satisfie his Rav’nous Maw.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if thou judge it hard and difficult,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Loves due Rites, Nuptial embraces sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with desire to languish without hope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before the present object languishing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With like desire, which would be miserie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And torment less then none of what we dread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then both our selves and Seed at once to free</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From what we fear for both, let us make short,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let us seek Death, or hee not found, supply</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With our own hands his Office on our selves;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why stand we longer shivering under feares,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That shew no end but Death, and have the power,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of many wayes to die the shortest choosing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Destruction with destruction to destroy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>She ended heer, or vehement despaire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Broke off the rest; so much of Death her thoughts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had entertaind, as di’d her Cheeks with pale.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Adam with such counsel nothing sway’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To better hopes his more attentive minde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Labouring had rais’d, and thus to Eve repli’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To argue in thee somthing more sublime</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And excellent then what thy minde contemnes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But self-destruction therefore saught, refutes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That excellence thought in thee, and implies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For loss of life and pleasure overlov’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or if thou covet death, as utmost end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of miserie, so thinking to evade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The penaltie pronounc’t, doubt not but God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath wiselier arm’d his vengeful ire then so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be forestall’d; much more I fear least Death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So snatcht will not exempt us from the paine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We are by doom to pay; rather such acts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of contumacie will provoke the highest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make death in us live: Then let us seek</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Som safer resolution, which methinks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have in view, calling to minde with heed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Part of our Sentence, that thy Seed shall bruise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Serpents head; piteous amends, unless</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand Foe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Satan, who in the Serpent hath contriv’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against us this deceit: to crush his head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By death brought on our selves, or childless days</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resolv’d, as thou proposest; so our Foe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall scape his punishment ordain’d, and wee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instead shall double ours upon our heads.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No more be mention’d then of violence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against our selves, and wilful barrenness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That cuts us off from hope, and savours onely</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rancor and pride, impatience and despite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reluctance against God and his just yoke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Laid on our Necks. Remember with what mild</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gracious temper he both heard and judg’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without wrauth or reviling; wee expected</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Immediate dissolution, which we thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pains onely in Child-bearing were foretold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bringing forth, soon recompenc’t with joy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fruit of thy Womb: On mee the Curse aslope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glanc’d on the ground, with labour I must earne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My bread; what harm? Idleness had bin worse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My labour will sustain me; and least Cold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or Heat should injure us, his timely care</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath unbesaught provided, and his hands</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cloath’d us unworthie, pitying while he judg’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How much more, if we pray him, will his ear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be open, and his heart to pitie incline,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And teach us further by what means to shun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ inclement Seasons, Rain, Ice, Hail and Snow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which now the Skie with various Face begins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To shew us in this Mountain, while the Winds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of these fair spreading Trees; which bids us seek</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Som better shroud, som better warmth to cherish</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our Limbs benumm’d, ere this diurnal Starr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leave cold the Night, how we his gather’d beams</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reflected, may with matter sere foment,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or by collision of two bodies grinde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Air attrite to Fire, as late the Clouds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Justling or pusht with Winds rude in thir shock</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tine the slant Lightning, whose thwart flame driv’n down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kindles the gummie bark of Firr or Pine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sends a comfortable heat from farr,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which might supplie the Sun: such Fire to use,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what may else be remedie or cure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hee will instruct us praying, and of Grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beseeching him, so as we need not fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To pass commodiously this life, sustain’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By him with many comforts, till we end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In dust, our final rest and native home.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What better can we do, then to the place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Repairing where he judg’d us, prostrate fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before him reverent, and there confess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVatering the ground, and with our sighs the Air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sorrow unfeign’d, and humiliation meek.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Undoubtedly he will relent and turn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From his displeasure; in whose look serene,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVhen angry most he seem’d and most severe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVhat else but favor, grace, and mercie shon?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake our Father penitent, nor Eve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Felt less remorse: they forthwith to the place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Repairing where he judg’d them prostrate fell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before him reverent, and both confess’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Humbly thir faults, and pardon beg’d, with tears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVatering the ground, and with thir sighs the Air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sorrow unfeign’d, and humiliation meek.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
