<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<p>
					<span>High on a Throne of Royal State, which far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outshon the wealth of <i>Ormus</i> and of <i>Ind</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showrs on her Kings <i>Barbaric</i> Pearl &amp; Gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Satan exalted sat, by merit rais’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that bad eminence; and from despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vain Warr with Heav’n, and by success untaught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His proud imaginations thus displaid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heav’n,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For since no deep within her gulf can hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immortal vigor, though opprest and fall’n,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I give not Heav’n for lost.  From this descent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Celestial vertues rising, will appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More glorious and more dread then from no fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trust themselves to fear no second fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mee though just right, and the fixt Laws of Heav’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did first create your Leader, next, free choice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath bin achievd of merit, yet this loss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus farr at least recover’d, hath much more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Establisht in a safe unenvied Throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yeilded with full consent.  The happier state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heav’n, which follows dignity, might draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Envy from each inferior; but who here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will envy whom the highest place exposes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Formost to stand against the Thunderers aime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of endless pain? where there is then no good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which to strive, no strife can grow up there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Faction; for none sure will claim in hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Precedence, none, whose portion is so small</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of present pain, that with ambitious mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will covet more.  With this advantage then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More then can be in Heav’n, we now return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To claim our just inheritance of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surer to prosper then prosperity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could have assur’d us; and by what best way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether of open Warr or covert guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We now debate; who can advise, may speak.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ceas’d, and next him <i>Moloc</i>, Scepter’d King</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fought in Heav’n; now fiercer by despair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His trust was with th’ Eternal to be deem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equal in strength, and rather then be less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Car’d not to be at all; with that care lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He reckd not, and these words thereafter spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My sentence is for open Warr: Of Wiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More unexpert, I boast not: them let those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contrive who need, or when they need, not now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For while they sit contriving, shall the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Millions that stand in Arms, and longing wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Signal to ascend, sit lingring here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heav’ns fugitives, and for thir dwelling place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accept this dark opprobrious Den of shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Prison of his Tyranny who Reigns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By our delay? no, let us rather choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arm’d with Hell flames and fury all at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’re Heav’ns high Towrs to force resistless way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turning our Tortures into horrid Arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his Almighty Engin he shall hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infernal Thunder, and for Lightning see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black fire and horror shot with equal rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among his Angels; and his Throne it self</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mixt with <i>Tartarean</i> Sulphur, and strange fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own invented Torments.  But perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The way seems difficult and steep to scale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With upright wing against a higher foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that forgetful Lake benumme not still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in our proper motion we ascend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to our native seat: descent and fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To us is adverse.  Who but felt of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the fierce Foe hung on our brok’n Rear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insulting, and pursu’d us through the Deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what compulsion and laborious flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We sunk thus low?  Th’ ascent is easie then;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ event is fear’d; should we again provoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To our destruction: if there be in Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fear to be worse destroy’d: what can be worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to dwell here, driv’n out from bliss, condemn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this abhorred deep to utter woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where pain of unextinguishable fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must exercise us without hope of end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Vassals of his anger, when the Scourge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inexorably, and the torturing houre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calls us to Penance?  More destroy’d then thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We should be quite abolisht and expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What fear we then? what doubt we to incense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His utmost ire? which to the highth enrag’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will either quite consume us, and reduce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To nothing this essential, happier farr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then miserable to have eternal being:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if our substance be indeed Divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cannot cease to be, we are at worst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this side nothing; and by proof we feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our power sufficient to disturb his Heav’n,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with perpetual inrodes to Allarme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though inaccessible, his fatal Throne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which if not Victory is yet Revenge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ended frowning, and his look denounc’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desperate revenge, and Battel dangerous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To less then Gods.  On th’ other side up rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Belial</i>, in act more graceful and humane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fairer person lost not Heav’n; he seemd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dignity compos’d and high exploit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all was false and hollow; though his Tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dropt Manna, and could make the worse appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The better reason, to perplex and dash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maturest Counsels: for his thoughts were low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To vice industrious, but to Nobler deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Timorous and slothful: yet he pleas’d the eare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with perswasive accent thus began.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I should be much for open Warr, O Peers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As not behind in hate; if what was urg’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Main reason to perswade immediate Warr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did not disswade me most, and seem to cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ominous conjecture on the whole success:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he who most excels in fact of Arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In what he counsels and in what excels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And utter dissolution, as the scope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First, what Revenge? the Towrs of Heav’n are fill’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Armed watch, that render all access</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encamp thir Legions, or with obscure wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scout farr and wide into the Realm of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scorning surprize.  Or could we break our way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blackest Insurrection, to confound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heav’ns purest Light, yet our great Enemie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All incorruptible would on his Throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit unpolluted, and th’ Ethereal mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incapable of stain would soon expel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Victorious.  Thus repuls’d, our final hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is flat despair: we must exasperate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ Almighty Victor to spend all his rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that must end us, that must be our cure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though full of pain, this intellectual being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those thoughts that wander through Eternity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To perish rather, swallowd up and lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the wide womb of uncreated night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let this be good, whether our angry Foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can give it, or will ever? how he can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is doubtful; that he never will is sure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Belike through impotence, or unaware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To give his Enemies thir wish, and end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them in his anger, whom his anger saves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To punish endless? wherefore cease we then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say they who counsel Warr, we are decreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reserv’d and destin’d to Eternal woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What can we suffer worse? is this then worst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What when we fled amain, pursu’d and strook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Heav’ns afflicting Thunder, and besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chain’d on the burning Lake? that sure was worse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What if the breath that kindl’d those grim fires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awak’d should blow them into sevenfold rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plunge us in the Flames? or from above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should intermitted vengeance Arme again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His red right hand to plague us? what if all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her stores were op’n’d, and this Firmament</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hell should spout her Cataracts of Fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impendent horrors, threatning hideous fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One day upon our heads; while we perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Designing or exhorting glorious Warr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught in a fierie Tempest shall be hurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each on his rock transfixt, the sport and prey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under yon boyling Ocean, wrapt in Chains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There to converse with everlasting groans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ages of hopeless end; this would be worse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warr therefore, open or conceal’d, alike</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My voice disswades; for what can force or guile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Views all things at one view? he from heav’ns highth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these our motions vain, sees and derides;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not more Almighty to resist our might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall we then live thus vile, the race of Heav’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus trampl’d, thus expell’d to suffer here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chains &amp; these Torments? better these then worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By my advice; since fate inevitable</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subdues us, and Omnipotent Decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Victors will.  To suffer, as to doe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That so ordains: this was at first resolv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If we were wise, against so great a foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vent’rous, if that fail them, shrink and fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What yet they know must follow, to endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sentence of thir Conquerour: This is now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Supream Foe in time may much remit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His anger, and perhaps thus farr remov’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not mind us not offending, satisfi’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what is punish’t; whence these raging fires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will slack’n, if his breath stir not thir flames.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our purer essence then will overcome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir noxious vapour, or enur’d not feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or chang’d at length, and to the place conformd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In temper and in nature, will receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This horror will grow milde, this darkness light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides what hope the never-ending flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of future days may bring, what chance, what change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worth waiting, since our present lot appeers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If we procure not to our selves more woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus <i>Belial</i> with words cloath’d in reasons garb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Counsel’d ignoble ease, and peaceful sloath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not peace: and after him thus <i>Mammon</i> spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Either to disinthrone the King of Heav’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We warr, if warr be best, or to regain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our own right lost: him to unthrone we then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May hope, when everlasting Fate shall yeild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fickle Chance, and <i>Chaos</i> judge the strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The former vain to hope argues as vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The latter: for what place can be for us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within Heav’ns bound, unless Heav’ns Lord supream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We overpower?  Suppose he should relent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And publish Grace to all, on promise made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand in his presence humble, and receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strict Laws impos’d, to celebrate his Throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With warbl’d Hymns, and to his Godhead sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forc’t Halleluiah’s; while he Lordly sits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our envied Sovran, and his Altar breathes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambrosial Odours and Ambrosial Flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our servile offerings.  This must be our task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heav’n, this our delight; how wearisom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternity so spent in worship paid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom we hate.  Let us not then pursue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By force impossible, by leave obtain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unacceptable, though in Heav’n, our state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of splendid vassalage, but rather seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our own good from our selves, and from our own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live to our selves, though in this vast recess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free, and to none accountable, preferring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard liberty before the easie yoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of servile Pomp.  Our greatness will appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then most conspicuous, when great things of small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We can create, and in what place so e’re</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through labour and endurance.  This deep world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of darkness do we dread?  How oft amidst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thick clouds and dark doth Heav’ns all-ruling Sire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choose to reside, his Glory unobscur’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the Majesty of darkness round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Covers his Throne; from whence deep thunders roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must’ring thir rage, and Heav’n resembles Hell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he our Darkness, cannot we his Light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imitate when we please?  This Desart soile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wants not her hidden lustre, Gemms and Gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor want we skill or art, from whence to raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Magnificence; and what can Heav’n shew more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our torments also may in length of time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become our Elements, these piercing Fires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soft as now severe, our temper chang’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into their temper; which must needs remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sensible of pain.  All things invite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To peaceful Counsels, and the settl’d State</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of order, how in safety best we may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compose our present evils, with regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what we are and where, dismissing quite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All thoughts of Warr: ye have what I advise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He scarce had finisht, when such murmur filld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ Assembly, as when hollow Rocks retain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sound of blustring winds, which all night long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had rous’d the Sea, now with hoarse cadence lull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sea-faring men orewatcht, whose Bark by chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Pinnace anchors in a craggy Bay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the Tempest: Such applause was heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As <i>Mammon</i> ended, and his Sentence pleas’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advising peace: for such another Field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They dreaded worse then Hell: so much the fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Thunder and the Sword of <i>Michael</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrought still within them; and no less desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To found this nether Empire, which might rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By pollicy, and long process of time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In emulation opposite to Heav’n.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which when <i>Beelzebub</i> perceiv’d, then whom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Satan</i> except, none higher sat, with grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aspect he rose, and in his rising seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Pillar of State; deep on his Front engraven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deliberation sat and publick care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Princely counsel in his face yet shon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Majestick though in ruin: sage he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With <i>Atlantean</i> shoulders fit to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weight of mightiest Monarchies; his look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew audience and attention still as Night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Summers Noon-tide air, while thus he spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thrones and imperial Powers, off-spring of heav’n,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ethereal Vertues; or these Titles now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must we renounce, and changing stile be call’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inclines, here to continue, and build up here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A growing Empire; doubtless; while we dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And know not that the King of Heav’n hath doom’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Heav’ns high jurisdiction, in new League</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Banded against his Throne, but to remaine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In strictest bondage, though thus far remov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under th’ inevitable curb, reserv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His captive multitude: For he, be sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In highth or depth, still first and last will Reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sole King, and of his Kingdom loose no part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By our revolt, but over Hell extend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Empire, and with Iron Scepter rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us here, as with his Golden those in Heav’n.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What sit we then projecting Peace and Warr?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warr hath determin’d us, and foild with loss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Irreparable; tearms of peace yet none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voutsaf’t or sought; for what peace will be giv’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To us enslav’d, but custody severe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stripes, and arbitrary punishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflicted? and what peace can we return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to our power hostility and hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untam’d reluctance, and revenge though slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet ever plotting how the Conquerour least</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May reap his conquest, and may least rejoyce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In doing what we most in suffering feel?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dangerous expedition to invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heav’n, whose high walls fear no assault or Siege,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ambush from the Deep.  What if we find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some easier enterprize?  There is a place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(If ancient and prophetic fame in Heav’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Err not) another World, the happy seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of som new Race call’d <i>Man</i>, about this time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be created like to us, though less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In power and excellence, but favour’d more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him who rules above; so was his will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pronounc’d among the Gods, and by an Oath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shook Heav’ns whol circumference, confirm’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What creatures there inhabit, of what mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or substance, how endu’d, and what thir Power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where thir weakness, how attempted best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By force or suttlety: Though Heav’n be shut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Heav’ns high Arbitrator sit secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his own strength, this place may lye expos’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The utmost border of his Kingdom, left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To their defence who hold it: here perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Som advantagious act may be achiev’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sudden onset, either with Hell fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To waste his whole Creation, or possess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All as our own, and drive as we were driven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The punie habitants, or if not drive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seduce them to our Party, that thir God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May prove thir foe, and with repenting hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abolish his own works.  This would surpass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Common revenge, and interrupt his joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In our Confusion, and our Joy upraise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his disturbance; when his darling Sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurl’d headlong to partake with us, shall curse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir frail Originals, and faded bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faded so soon.  Advise if this be worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attempting, or to sit in darkness here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hatching vain Empires.  Thus <i>Beelzebub</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleaded his devilish Counsel, first devis’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By <i>Satan</i>, and in part propos’d: for whence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from the Author of all ill could Spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So deep a malice, to confound the race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mingle and involve, done all to spite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great Creatour?  But thir spite still serves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His glory to augment.  The bold design</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleas’d highly those infernal States, and joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sparkl’d in all thir eyes; with full assent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well have ye judg’d, well ended long debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Synod of Gods, and like to what ye are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great things resolv’d; which from the lowest deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will once more lift us up, in spight of Fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neerer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those bright confines, whence with neighbouring Arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And opportune excursion we may chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Re-enter Heav’n; or else in some milde Zone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwell not unvisited of Heav’ns fair Light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Secure, and at the brightning Orient beam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Purge off this gloom; the soft delicious Air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To heal the scarr of these corrosive Fires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall breath her balme.  But first whom shall we send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In search of this new world, whom shall we find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandring feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dark unbottom’d infinite Abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the palpable obscure find out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His uncouth way, or spread his aerie flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upborn with indefatigable wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The happy Ile; what strength, what art can then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the strict Senteries and Stations thick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Angels watching round?  Here he had need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All circumspection, and we now no less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weight of all and our last hope relies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This said, he sat; and expectation held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His look suspence, awaiting who appeer’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To second, or oppose, or undertake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perilous attempt: but all sat mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; &amp; each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In others count’nance red his own dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Astonisht: none among the choice and prime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those Heav’n-warring Champions could be found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So hardie as to proffer or accept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone the dreadful voyage; till at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Satan</i>, whom now transcendent glory rais’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conscious of highest worth, unmov’d thus spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Progeny of Heav’n, Empyreal Thrones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With reason hath deep silence and demurr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seis’d us, though undismaid: long is the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hard, that out of Hell leads up to Light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our prison strong, this huge convex of Fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outrageous to devour, immures us round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Barr’d over us prohibit all egress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These past, if any pass, the void profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of unessential Night receives him next</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Threatens him, plung’d in that abortive gulf.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thence he scape into what ever world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or unknown Region, what remains him less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then unknown dangers and as hard escape.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this Imperial Sov’ranty, adorn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With splendor, arm’d with power, if aught propos’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And judg’d of public moment, in the shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of difficulty or danger could deterre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me from attempting.  Wherefore do I assume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These Royalties, and not refuse to Reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refusing to accept as great a share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hazard as of honour, due alike</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him who Reigns, and so much to him due</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hazard more, as he above the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High honourd sits?  Go therfore mighty powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Terror of Heav’n, though fall’n; intend at home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While here shall be our home, what best may ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The present misery, and render Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More tollerable; if there be cure or charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To respite or deceive, or slack the pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the coasts of dark destruction seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deliverance for us all: this enterprize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None shall partake with me.  Thus saying rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Monarch, and prevented all reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prudent, least from his resolution rais’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others among the chief might offer now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Certain to be refus’d) what erst they feard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so refus’d might in opinion stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rivals, winning cheap the high repute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he through hazard huge must earn.  But they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreaded not more th’ adventure then his voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forbidding; and at once with him they rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir rising all at once was as the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Thunder heard remote.  Towards him they bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With awful reverence prone; and as a God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extoll him equal to the highest in Heav’n:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor fail’d they to express how much they prais’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for the general safety he despis’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own: for neither do the Spirits damn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loose all thir vertue; least bad men should boast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or close ambition varnisht o’re with zeal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus they thir doubtful consultations dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ended rejoycing in thir matchless Chief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ascending, while the North wind sleeps, o’respread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heav’ns chearful face, the lowring Element</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scowls ore the dark’nd lantskip Snow, or showre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extend his ev’ning beam, the fields revive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The birds thir notes renew, and bleating herds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attest thir joy, that hill and valley rings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O shame to men!  Devil with Devil damn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firm concord holds, men onely disagree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Creatures rational, though under hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet live in hatred, enmitie, and strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among themselves, and levie cruel warres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if (which might induce us to accord)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man had not hellish foes anow besides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That day and night for his destruction waite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The <i>Stygian</i> Councel thus dissolv’d; and forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In order came the grand infernal Peers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Midst came thir mighty Paramount, and seemd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone th’ Antagonist of Heav’n, nor less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Hells dread Emperour with pomp Supream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And God-like imitated State; him round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Globe of fierie Seraphim inclos’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bright imblazonrie, and horrent Arms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then of thir Session ended they bid cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Trumpets regal sound the great result:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put to thir mouths the sounding Alchymie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Haralds voice explain’d: the hollow Abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heard farr and wide, and all the host of Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deafning shout, return’d them loud acclaim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence more at ease thir minds and somwhat rais’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By false presumptuous hope, the ranged powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disband, and wandring, each his several way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursues, as inclination or sad choice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leads him perplext, where he may likeliest find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The irksome hours, till his great Chief return.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part on the Plain, or in the Air sublime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the wing, or in swift race contend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As at th’ Olympian Games or <i>Pythian</i> fields;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part curb thir fierie Steeds, or shun the Goal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rapid wheels, or fronted Brigads form.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when to warn proud Cities warr appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wag’d in the troubl’d Skie, and Armies rush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Battel in the Clouds, before each Van</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pric forth the Aerie Knights, and couch thir spears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till thickest Legions close; with feats of Arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From either end of Heav’n the welkin burns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others with vast <i>Typhoean</i> rage more fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wilde uproar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when <i>Alcides</i> from <i>Oealia</i> Crown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With conquest, felt th’ envenom’d robe, and tore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through pain up by the roots <i>Thessalian</i> Pines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And <i>Lichas</i> from the top of <i>Oeta</i> threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into th’ <i>Euboic</i> Sea.  Others more milde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Retreated in a silent valley, sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With notes Angelical to many a Harp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir own Heroic deeds and hapless fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By doom of Battel; and complain that Fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free Vertue should enthrall to Force or Chance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir song was partial, but the harmony</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thronging audience.  In discourse more sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others apart sat on a Hill retir’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thoughts more elevate, and reason’d high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will, and Fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fixt Fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found no end, in wandring mazes lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of good and evil much they argu’d then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happiness and final misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passion and Apathie, and glory and shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vain wisdom all, and false Philosophie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet with a pleasing sorcerie could charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pain for a while or anguish, and excite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fallacious hope, or arm th’ obdured brest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With stubborn patience as with triple steel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another part in Squadrons and gross Bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On bold adventure to discover wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dismal world, if any Clime perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might yeild them easier habitation, bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four ways thir flying March, along the Banks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of four infernal Rivers that disgorge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the burning Lake thir baleful streams;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abhorred <i>Styx</i> the flood of deadly hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad <i>Acheron</i> of sorrow, black and deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Cocytus</i>, nam’d of lamentation loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heard on the ruful stream; fierce <i>Phlegeton</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farr off from these a slow and silent stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Lethe</i> the River of Oblivion roules</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her watrie Labyrinth, whereof who drinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forthwith his former state and being forgets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond this flood a frozen Continent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies dark and wilde, beat with perpetual storms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Whirlwind and dire Hail, which on firm land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gulf profound as that <i>Serbonian</i> Bog</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt <i>Damiata</i> and mount <i>Casius</i> old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Armies whole have sunk: the parching Air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burns frore, and cold performs th’ effect of Fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither by harpy-footed Furies hail’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At certain revolutions all the damn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are brought: and feel by turns the bitter change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fierce extreams, extreams by change more fierce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Beds of raging Fire to starve in Ice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir soft Ethereal warmth, and there to pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immovable, infixt, and frozen round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They ferry over this <i>Lethean</i> Sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both to and fro, thir sorrow to augment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tempting stream, with one small drop to loose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in one moment, and so neer the brink;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fate withstands, and to oppose th’ attempt</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Medusa</i> with <i>Gorgonian</i> terror guards</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ford, and of it self the water flies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All taste of living wight, as once it fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lip of <i>Tantalus</i>.  Thus roving on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In confus’d march forlorn, th’ adventrous Bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shuddring horror pale, and eyes agast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>View’d first thir lamentable lot, and found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No rest: through many a dark and drearie Vaile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They pass’d, and many a Region dolorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’re many a Frozen, many a Fierie Alpe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rocks, Caves, Lakes, Fens, Bogs, Dens, and shades of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Universe of death, which God by curse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Created evil, for evil only good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all life dies, death lives, and nature breeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abominable, inutterable, and worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Fables yet have feign’d, or fear conceiv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Gorgons</i> and <i>Hydra’s</i>, and <i>Chimera’s</i> dire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mean while the Adversary of God and Man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Satan</i> with thoughts inflam’d of highest design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Puts on swift wings, and toward the Gates of Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Explores his solitary flight; som times</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He scours the right hand coast, som times the left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now shaves with level wing the Deep, then soares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the fiery concave touring high.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when farr off at Sea a Fleet descri’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hangs in the Clouds, by <i>Aequinoctial</i> Winds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close sailing from <i>Bengala</i>, or the Iles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of <i>Ternate</i> and <i>Tidore</i>, whence Merchants bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir spicie Drugs: they on the trading Flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the wide <i>Ethiopian</i> to the Cape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ply stemming nightly toward the Pole.  So seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farr off the flying Fiend: at last appeer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Brass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three Iron, three of Adamantine Rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impenitrable, impal’d with circling fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet unconsum’d.  Before the Gates there sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On either side a formidable shape;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one seem’d Woman to the waste, and fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ended foul in many a scaly fould</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voluminous and vast, a Serpent arm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mortal sting: about her middle round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cry of Hell Hounds never ceasing bark’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wide <i>Cerberean</i> mouths full loud, and rung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hideous Peal: yet, when they list, would creep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If aught disturb’d thir noyse, into her woomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kennel there, yet there still bark’d and howl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within unseen.  Farr less abhorrd then these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vex’d <i>Scylla</i> bathing in the Sea that parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Calabria</i> from the hoarce <i>Trinacrian</i> shore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when call’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In secret, riding through the Air she comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lur’d with the smell of infant blood, to dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With <i>Lapland</i> Witches, while the labouring Moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eclipses at thir charms.  The other shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If shape it might be call’d that shape had none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distinguishable in member, joynt, or limb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or substance might be call’d that shadow seem’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For each seem’d either; black it stood as Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shook a dreadful Dart; what seem’d his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Satan</i> was now at hand, and from his seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Monster moving onward came as fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With horrid strides, Hell trembled as he strode.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ undaunted Fiend what this might be admir’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admir’d, not fear’d; God and his Son except,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Created thing naught vallu’d he nor shun’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with disdainful look thus first began.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whence and what art thou, execrable shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dar’st, though grim and terrible, advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy miscreated Front athwart my way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That be assur’d, without leave askt of thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heav’n.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the Goblin full of wrauth reply’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou hee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who first broke peace in Heav’n and Faith, till then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unbrok’n, and in proud rebellious Arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew after him the third part of Heav’ns Sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conjur’d against the highest, for which both Thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they outcast from God, are here condemn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To waste Eternal daies in woe and pain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reck’n’st thou thy self with Spirits of Heav’n,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hell-doomd, and breath’st defiance here and scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy King and Lord?  Back to thy punishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least with a whip of Scorpions I pursue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy lingring, or with one stroke of this Dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange horror seise thee, and pangs unfelt before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake the grieslie terrour, and in shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So speaking and so threatning, grew ten fold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More dreadful and deform: on th’ other side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incenc’t with indignation <i>Satan</i> stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unterrifi’d, and like a Comet burn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fires the length of <i>Ophiucus</i> huge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In th’ Artick Sky, and from his horrid hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shakes Pestilence and Warr.  Each at the Head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Level’d his deadly aime; thir fatall hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No second stroke intend, and such a frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each cast at th’ other, as when two black Clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Heav’ns Artillery fraught, come rattling on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the <i>Caspian</i>, then stand front to front</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hov’ring a space, till Winds the signal blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To joyn thir dark Encounter in mid air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So frownd the mighty Combatants, that Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew darker at thir frown, so matcht they stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never but once more was either like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet so great a foe: and now great deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had been achiev’d, whereof all Hell had rung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not the Snakie Sorceress that sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fast by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ris’n, and with hideous outcry rush’d between.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Father, what intends thy hand, she cry’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against thy only Son?  What fury O Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against thy Fathers head? and know’st for whom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him who sits above and laughs the while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At thee ordain’d his drudge, to execute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What e’re his wrath, which he calls Justice, bids,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wrath which one day will destroy ye both.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forbore, then these to her <i>Satan</i> return’d:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou interposest, that my sudden hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prevented spares to tell thee yet by deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What it intends; till first I know of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thing thou art, thus double-form’d, and why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this infernal Vaile first met thou call’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me Father, and that Fantasm call’st my Son?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know thee not, nor ever saw till now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sight more detestable then him and thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>T’ whom thus the Portress of Hell Gate reply’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou forgot me then, and do I seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now in thine eye so foul, once deemd so fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heav’n, when at th’ Assembly, and in sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the Seraphim with thee combin’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bold conspiracy against Heav’ns King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All on a sudden miserable pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surpris’d thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzie swumm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Threw forth, till on the left side op’ning wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Likest to thee in shape and count’nance bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shining heav’nly fair, a Goddess arm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of thy head I sprung: amazement seis’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All th’ Host of Heav’n; back they recoild affraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first, and call’d me <i>Sin</i>, and for a Sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Portentous held me; but familiar grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pleas’d, and with attractive graces won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The most averse, thee chiefly, who full oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy self in me thy perfect image viewing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Becam’st enamour’d, and such joy thou took’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With me in secret, that my womb conceiv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A growing burden.  Mean while Warr arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fields were fought in Heav’n; wherein remaind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For what could else) to our Almighty Foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cleer Victory, to our part loss and rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all the Empyrean: down they fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driv’n headlong from the Pitch of Heaven, down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into this Deep, and in the general fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I also; at which time this powerful Key</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into my hand was giv’n, with charge to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These Gates for ever shut, which none can pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without my op’ning.  Pensive here I sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last this odious offspring whom thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine own begotten, breaking violent way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transform’d: but he my inbred enemie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth issu’d, brandishing his fatal Dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made to destroy: I fled, and cry’d out <i>Death</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hell trembl’d at the hideous Name, and sigh’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all her Caves, and back resounded <i>Death</i>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fled, but he pursu’d (though more, it seems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflam’d with lust then rage) and swifter far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me overtook his mother all dismaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in embraces forcible and foule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ingendring with me, of that rape begot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These yelling Monsters that with ceasless cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surround me, as thou sawst, hourly conceiv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hourly born, with sorrow infinite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me, for when they list into the womb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bred them they return, and howle and gnaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Bowels, their repast; then bursting forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afresh with conscious terrours vex me round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rest or intermission none I find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before mine eyes in opposition sits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grim <i>Death</i> my Son and foe, who sets them on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And me his Parent would full soon devour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For want of other prey, but that he knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His end with mine involvd; and knows that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should prove a bitter Morsel, and his bane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When ever that shall be; so Fate pronounc’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou O Father, I forewarn thee, shun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be invulnerable in those bright Arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though temper’d heav’nly, for that mortal dint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save he who reigns above, none can resist.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She finish’d, and the suttle Fiend his lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon learnd, now milder, and thus answerd smooth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear Daughter, since thou claim’st me for thy Sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my fair Son here showst me, the dear pledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dalliance had with thee in Heav’n, and joys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Befalln us unforeseen, unthought of, know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I come no enemie, but to set free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out this dark and dismal house of pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both him and thee, and all the heav’nly Host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Spirits that in our just pretenses arm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell with us from on high: from them I go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This uncouth errand sole, and one for all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My self expose, with lonely steps to tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ unfounded deep, &amp; through the void immense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To search with wandring quest a place foretold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should be, and, by concurring signs, ere now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Created vast and round, a place of bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the Pourlieues of Heav’n, and therein plac’t</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A race of upstart Creatures, to supply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps our vacant room, though more remov’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least Heav’n surcharg’d with potent multitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might hap to move new broiles: Be this or aught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then this more secret now design’d, I haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know, and this once known, shall soon return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring ye to the place where Thou and Death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wing silently the buxom Air, imbalm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With odours; there ye shall be fed and fill’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immeasurably, all things shall be your prey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ceas’d, for both seemd highly pleasd, and Death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grinnd horrible a gastly smile, to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His famine should be fill’d, and blest his mawe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Destin’d to that good hour: no less rejoyc’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mother bad, and thus bespake her Sire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The key of this infernal Pit by due,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by command of Heav’ns all-powerful King</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I keep, by him forbidden to unlock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These Adamantine Gates; against all force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death ready stands to interpose his dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearless to be o’rematcht by living might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what ow I to his commands above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into this gloom of <i>Tartarus</i> profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sit in hateful Office here confin’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inhabitant of Heav’n, and heav’nlie-born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here in perpetual agonie and pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With terrors and with clamors compasst round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art my Father, thou my Author, thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My being gav’st me; whom should I obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thee, whom follow? thou wilt bring me soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that new world of light and bliss, among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Gods who live at ease, where I shall Reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy daughter and thy darling, without end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus saying, from her side the fatal Key,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad instrument of all our woe, she took;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And towards the Gate rouling her bestial train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forthwith the huge Porcullis high up drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which but her self not all the <i>Stygian</i> powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could once have mov’d; then in the key-hole turns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ intricate wards, and every Bolt and Bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of massie Iron or sollid Rock with ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfast’ns: on a sudden op’n flie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With impetuous recoile and jarring sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ infernal dores, and on thir hinges great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harsh Thunder, that the lowest bottom shook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of <i>Erebus</i>.  She op’nd, but to shut</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excel’d her power; the Gates wide op’n stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with extended wings a Bannerd Host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under spread Ensigns marching might pass through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Horse and Chariots rankt in loose array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wide they stood, and like a Furnace mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast forth redounding smoak and ruddy flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before thir eyes in sudden view appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The secrets of the hoarie deep, a dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illimitable Ocean without bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without dimension, where length, breadth, and highth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And time and place are lost; where eldest Night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And <i>Chaos</i>, Ancestors of Nature, hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternal <i>Anarchie</i>, amidst the noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of endless warrs and by confusion stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For hot, cold, moist, and dry, four Champions fierce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strive here for Maistrie, and to Battel bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir embryon Atoms; they around the flag</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of each his faction, in thir several Clanns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light-arm’d or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift or slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swarm populous, unnumber’d as the Sands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of <i>Barca</i> or <i>Cyrene’s</i> torrid soil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Levied to side with warring Winds, and poise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir lighter wings.  To whom these most adhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hee rules a moment; <i>Chaos</i> Umpire sits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by decision more imbroiles the fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which he Reigns: next him high Arbiter</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Chance</i> governs all.  Into this wilde Abyss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Womb of nature and perhaps her Grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of neither Sea, nor Shore, nor Air, nor Fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all these in thir pregnant causes mixt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confus’dly, and which thus must ever fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless th’ Almighty Maker them ordain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His dark materials to create more Worlds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into this wilde Abyss the warie fiend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood on the brink of Hell and look’d a while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pondering his Voyage; for no narrow frith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had to cross.  Nor was his eare less peal’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With noises loud and ruinous (to compare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great things with small) then when <i>Bellona</i> storms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all her battering Engines bent to rase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Som Capital City, or less then if this frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Heav’n were falling, and these Elements</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mutinie had from her Axle torn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stedfast Earth.  At last his Sail-broad Vannes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spreads for flight, and in the surging smoak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplifted spurns the ground, thence many a League</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in a cloudy Chair ascending rides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Audacious, but that seat soon failing, meets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vast vacuitie: all unawares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fluttring his pennons vain plumb down he drops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten thousand fadom deep, and to this hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down had been falling, had not by ill chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strong rebuff of som tumultuous cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instinct with Fire and Nitre hurried him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many miles aloft: that furie stay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quencht in a Boggie <i>Syrtris</i>, neither Sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor good dry Land: nigh founderd on he fares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Treading the crude consistence, half on foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half flying; behoves him now both Oare and Saile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when a Gryfon through the Wilderness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With winged course ore Hill or moarie Dale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursues the <i>Arimaspian</i>, who by stelth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had from his wakeful custody purloind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guarded Gold: So eagerly the fiend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ore bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swims or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length a universal hubbub wilde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of stunning sounds and voices all confus’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born through the hollow dark assaults his eare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With loudest vehemence: thither he plyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Undaunted to meet there what ever power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which way the neerest coast of darkness lyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bordering on light; when strait behold the Throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of <i>Chaos</i>, and his dark Pavilion spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide on the wasteful Deep; with him Enthron’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat Sable-vested Night, eldest of things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The consort of his Reign; and by them stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Orcus</i> and <i>Ades</i>, and the dreaded name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of <i>Demogorgon</i>; Rumor next and Chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Tumult and Confusion all imbroild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Discord with a thousand various mouths.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>T’ whom <i>Satan</i> turning boldly, thus.  Ye Powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Chaos</i> and <i>Ancient Night</i>, I come no Spie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With purpose to explore or to disturb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The secrets of your Realm, but by constraint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wandring this darksome desart, as my way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies through your spacious Empire up to light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone, and without guide, half lost, I seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What readiest path leads where your gloomie bounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confine with Heav’n; or if som other place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From your Dominion won, th’ Ethereal King</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possesses lately, thither to arrive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I travel this profound, direct my course;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Directed, no mean recompence it brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To your behoof, if I that Region lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All usurpation thence expell’d, reduce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her original darkness and your sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Which is my present journey) and once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Erect the Standerd there of <i>Ancient Night</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yours be th’ advantage all, mine the revenge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus <i>Satan</i>; and him thus the Anarch old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With faultring speech and visage incompos’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answer’d.  I know thee, stranger, who thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mighty leading Angel, who of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made head against Heav’ns King, though overthrown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw and heard, for such a numerous host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fled not in silence through the frighted deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confusion worse confounded; and Heav’n Gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pourd out by millions her victorious Bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursuing.  I upon my Frontieres here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep residence; if all I can will serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That little which is left so to defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encroacht on still through our intestine broiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weakning the Scepter of old Night: first Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your dungeon stretching far and wide beneath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now lately Heaven and Earth, another World</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung ore my Realm, link’d in a golden Chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that side Heav’n from whence your Legions fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that way be your walk, you have not farr;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much the neerer danger; goe and speed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Havock and spoil and ruin are my gain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ceas’d; and <i>Satan</i> staid not to reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But glad that now his Sea should find a shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fresh alacritie and force renew’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Springs upward like a Pyramid of fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the wilde expanse, and through the shock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fighting Elements, on all sides round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Environ’d wins his way; harder beset</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more endanger’d, then when <i>Argo</i> pass’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through <i>Bosporus</i> betwixt the justling Rocks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or when <i>Ulysses</i> on the Larbord shunnd</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Charybdis</i>, and by th’ other whirlpool steard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So he with difficulty and labour hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mov’d on, with difficulty and labour hee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hee once past, soon after when man fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange alteration!  Sin and Death amain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Following his track, such was the will of Heav’n,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pav’d after him a broad and beat’n way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling Gulf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tamely endur’d a Bridge of wondrous length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Hell continu’d reaching th’ utmost Orbe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With easie intercourse pass to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tempt or punish mortals, except whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God and good Angels guard by special grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now at last the sacred influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of light appears, and from the walls of Heav’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shoots farr into the bosom of dim Night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A glimmering dawn; here Nature first begins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fardest verge, and <i>Chaos</i> to retire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from her outmost works a brok’n foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tumult less and with less hostile din,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That <i>Satan</i> with less toil, and now with ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like a weather-beaten Vessel holds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gladly the Port, though Shrouds and Tackle torn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the emptier waste, resembling Air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weighs his spread wings, at leasure to behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farr off th’ Empyreal Heav’n, extended wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In circuit, undetermind square or round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Opal Towrs and Battlements adorn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of living Saphire, once his native Seat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fast by hanging in a golden Chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This pendant world, in bigness as a Starr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of smallest Magnitude close by the Moon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither full fraught with mischievous revenge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accurst, and in a cursed hour he hies.</span>
				</p>
				<h5>      THE END OF THE SECOND BOOK.</h5>
				<h4>  PARADISE LOST</h4>
				<p>
					<a id="link2HCH0003" name="link2HCH0003">
						<!--  H2 anchor -->
					</a>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
