<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-10" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Thus they in lowliest plight repentant stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Praying, for from the Mercie-seat above</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prevenient Grace descending had remov’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The stonie from thir hearts, and made new flesh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Regenerat grow instead, that sighs now breath’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inspir’d, and wing’d for Heav’n with speedier flight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then loudest Oratorie: yet thir port</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not of mean suiters, nor important less</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seem’d thir Petition, then when th’ ancient Pair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Fables old, less ancient yet then these,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Deucalion</i> and chaste <i>Pyrrha</i> to restore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Race of Mankind drownd, before the Shrine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Themis</i> stood devout. To Heav’n thir prayers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious windes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blow’n vagabond or frustrate: in they passd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dimentionless through Heav’nly dores; then clad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With incense, where the Golden Altar fum’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By thir great Intercessor, came in sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad Son</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Presenting, thus to intercede began.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer, mixt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sow’n with contrition in his heart, then those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which his own hand manuring all the Trees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Paradise could have produc’t, ere fall’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From innocence. Now therefore bend thine eare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To supplication, heare his sighs though mute;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unskilful with what words to pray, let mee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Interpret for him, mee his Advocate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And propitiation, all his works on mee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Good or not good ingraft, my Merit those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall perfet, and for these my Death shall pay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accept me, and in mee from these receave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The smell of peace toward Mankinde, let him live</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before thee reconcil’d, at least his days</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Numberd, though sad, till Death, his doom (which I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To better life shall yeeld him, where with mee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All my redeemd may dwell in joy and bliss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made one with me as I with thee am one.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom the Father, without Cloud, serene.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All thy request for Man, accepted Son,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Obtain, all thy request was my Decree:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But longer in that Paradise to dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Law I gave to Nature him forbids:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those pure immortal Elements that know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foule,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eject him tainted now, and purge him off</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As a distemper, gross to aire as gross,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mortal food, as may dispose him best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Distemperd all things, and of incorrupt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corrupted. I at first with two fair gifts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Created him endowd, with Happiness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Immortalitie: that fondly lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This other serv’d but to eternize woe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till I provided Death; so Death becomes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His final remedie, and after Life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tri’d in sharp tribulation, and refin’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Faith and faithful works, to second Life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wak’t in the renovation of the just,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resignes him up with Heav’n and Earth renewd.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But let us call to Synod all the Blest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through Heav’ns wide bounds; from them I will not hide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As how with peccant Angels late they saw;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in thir state, though firm, stood more confirmd.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He ended, and the Son gave signal high</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the bright Minister that watchd, hee blew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Trumpet, heard in <i>Oreb</i> since perhaps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When God descended, and perhaps once more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sound at general Doom. Th’ Angelic blast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Filld all the Regions: from thir blissful Bowrs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Amarantin</i> Shade, Fountain or Spring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By the waters of Life, where ere they sate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hasted, resorting to the Summons high,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And took thir Seats; till from his Throne supream</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Almighty thus pronounced his sovran Will.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O Sons, like one of us Man is become</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To know both Good and Evil, since his taste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of that defended Fruit; but let him boast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Happier, had it suffic’d him to have known</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Good by it self, and Evil not at all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He sorrows now, repents, and prayes contrite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My motions in him, longer then they move,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His heart I know, how variable and vain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Self-left. Least therefore his now bolder hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And live for ever, dream at least to live</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forever, to remove him I decree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And send him from the Garden forth to Till</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soile.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Michael</i>, this my behest have thou in charge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take to thee from among the Cherubim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy choice of flaming Warriours, least the Fiend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or in behalf of Man, or to invade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vacant possession som new trouble raise:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hast thee, and from the Paradise of God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From hallowd ground th’ unholie, and denounce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To them and to thir Progenie from thence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perpetual banishment. Yet least they faint</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At the sad Sentence rigorously urg’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For I behold them soft’nd and with tears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bewailing thir excess, all terror hide.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If patiently thy bidding they obey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To <i>Adam</i> what shall come in future dayes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I shall thee enlighten, intermix</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Cov’nant in the Womans seed renewd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on the East side of the Garden place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where entrance up from <i>Eden</i> easiest climbes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wide waving, all approach farr off to fright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And guard all passage to the Tree of Life:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Least Paradise a receptacle prove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Spirits foule, and all my Trees thir prey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With whose stol’n Fruit Man once more to delude.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He ceas’d; and th’ Archangelic Power prepar’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For swift descent, with him the Cohort bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had, like a double <i>Janus</i>, all thir shape</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spangl’d with eyes more numerous then those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Argus</i>, and more wakeful then to drouze,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Charm’d with <i>Arcadian</i> Pipe, the Pastoral Reed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Hermes</i>, or his opiate Rod. Meanwhile</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To resalute the World with sacred Light</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Leucothea</i> wak’d, and with fresh dews imbalmd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Earth, when <i>Adam</i> and first Matron <i>Eve</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had ended now thir Orisons, and found,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strength added from above, new hope to spring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of despaire, joy, but with fear yet linkt;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which thus to <i>Eve</i> his welcome words renewd.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Eve</i>, easily may Faith admit, that all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The good which we enjoy, from Heav’n descends</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that from us ought should ascend to Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So prevalent as to concerne the mind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of God high blest, or to incline his will,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ev’n to the Seat of God. For since I saught</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Prayer th’ offended Deitie to appease,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kneel’d and before him humbl’d all my heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Methought I saw him placable and mild,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bending his eare; perswasion in me grew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I was heard with favour; peace returnd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Home to my brest, and to my memorie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which then not minded in dismay, yet now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assures me that the bitterness of death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is past, and we shall live. Whence Haile to thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Eve</i> rightly call’d, Mother of all Mankind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mother of all things living, since by thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man is to live, and all things live for Man.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Eve</i> with sad demeanour meek.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ill worthie I such title should belong</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To me transgressour, who for thee ordaind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A help, became thy snare; to mee reproach</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But infinite in pardon was my Judge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I who first brought Death on all, am grac’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sourse of life; next favourable thou,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who highly thus to entitle me voutsaf’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farr other name deserving. But the Field</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To labour calls us now with sweat impos’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though after sleepless Night; for see the Morn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All unconcern’d with our unrest, begins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her rosie progress smiling; let us forth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I never from thy side henceforth to stray,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What can be toilsom in these pleasant Walkes?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here let us live, though in fall’n state, content.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake, so wish’d much-humbl’d <i>Eve</i>, but Fate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Subscrib’d not; Nature first gave Signs, imprest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On Bird, Beast, Aire, Aire suddenly eclips’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After short blush of Morn; nigh in her sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Bird of <i>Jove</i>, stoopt from his aerie tour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two Birds of gayest plume before him drove:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down from a Hill the Beast that reigns in Woods,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First Hunter then, pursu’d a gentle brace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Goodliest of all the Forrest, Hart and Hinde;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Direct to th’ Eastern Gate was bent thir flight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Adam</i> observ’d, and with his Eye the chase</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pursuing, not unmov’d to <i>Eve</i> thus spake.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O <i>Eve</i>, some furder change awaits us nigh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which Heav’n by these mute signs in Nature shews</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Us haply too secure of our discharge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From penaltie, because from death releast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some days; how long, and what till then our life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who knows, or more then this, that we are dust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thither must return and be no more.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVhy else this double object in our sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of flight pursu’d in th’ Air and ore the ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One way the self-same hour? why in the East</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Darkness ere Dayes mid-course, and Morning light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More orient in yon VVestern Cloud that draws</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’re the blew Firmament a radiant white,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And slow descends, with somthing heav’nly fraught.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He err’d not, for by this the heav’nly Bands</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down from a Skie of Jasper lighted now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Paradise, and on a Hill made alt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A glorious Apparition, had not doubt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And carnal fear that day dimm’d <i>Adams</i> eye.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not that more glorious, when the Angels met</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Jacob</i> in <i>Mahanaim</i>, where he saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The field Pavilion’d with his Guardians bright;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor that which on the flaming Mount appeerd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In <i>Dothan</i>, cover’d with a Camp of Fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against the <i>Syrian</i> King, who to surprize</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One man, Assassin-like had levied Warr,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Warr unproclam’d. The Princely Hierarch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In thir bright stand, there left his Powers to seise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Possession of the Garden; hee alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To finde where <i>Adam</i> shelterd, took his way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not unperceav’d of <i>Adam</i>, who to <i>Eve</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While the great Visitant approachd, thus spake.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Eve</i>, now expect great tidings, which perhaps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of us will soon determin, or impose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>New Laws to be observ’d; for I descrie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One of the heav’nly Host, and by his Gate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None of the meanest, some great Potentate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or of the Thrones above, such Majestie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Invests him coming; yet not terrible,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I should fear, nor sociably mild,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As <i>Raphael</i>, that I should much confide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He ended; and th’ Arch-Angel soon drew nigh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not in his shape Celestial, but as Man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Clad to meet Man; over his lucid Armes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A militarie Vest of purple flowd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Livelier then <i>Meliboean</i>, or the graine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Sarra</i>, worn by Kings and Hero’s old</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In time of Truce; <i>Iris</i> had dipt the wooff;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His starrie Helme unbuckl’d shew’d him prime</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As in a glistering <i>Zodiac</i> hung the Sword,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Satans dire dread, and in his hand the Spear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Adam</i> bowd low, hee Kingly from his State</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inclin’d not, but his coming thus declar’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Adam</i>, Heav’ns high behest no Preface needs:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sufficient that thy Prayers are heard, and Death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Defeated of his seisure many dayes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Giv’n thee of Grace, wherein thou may’st repent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And one bad act with many deeds well done</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mayst cover: well may then thy Lord appeas’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claimes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But longer in this Paradise to dwell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Permits not; to remove thee I am come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And send thee from the Garden forth to till</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ground whence thou wast tak’n, fitter Soile.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He added not, for <i>Adam</i> at the newes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heart-strook with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That all his senses bound; <i>Eve</i>, who unseen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet all had heard, with audible lament</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discover’d soon the place of her retire.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O unexpected stroke, worse then of Death!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thee Native Soile, these happie Walks and Shades,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quiet though sad, the respit of that day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That must be mortal to us both. O flours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That never will in other Climate grow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My early visitation, and my last</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At Eev’n, which I bred up with tender hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From the first op’ning bud, and gave ye Names,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who now shall reare ye to the Sun, or ranke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your Tribes, and water from th’ ambrosial Fount?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thee lastly nuptial Bowre, by mee adornd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With what to sight or smell was sweet; from thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How shall I part, and whither wander down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into a lower World, to this obscure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wilde, how shall we breath in other Aire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Less pure, accustomd to immortal Fruits?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Whom thus the Angel interrupted milde.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lament not <i>Eve</i>, but patiently resigne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What justly thou hast lost; nor set thy heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus over fond, on that which is not thine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy going is not lonely, with thee goes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy Husband, him to follow thou art bound;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where he abides, think there thy native soile.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Adam</i> by this from the cold sudden damp</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Recovering, and his scatterd spirits returnd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To <i>Michael</i> thus his humble words addressd.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or nam’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of them the Highest, for such of shape may seem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prince above Princes, gently hast thou tould</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy message, which might else in telling wound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in performing end us; what besides</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sorrow and dejection and despair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our frailtie can sustain, thy tidings bring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Departure from this happy place, our sweet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Recess, and onely consolation left</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Familiar to our eyes, all places else</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inhospitable appeer and desolate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Incessant I could hope to change the will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of him who all things can, I would not cease</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To wearie him with my assiduous cries:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But prayer against his absolute Decree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No more availes then breath against the winde,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blown stifling back on him that breaths it forth:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore to his great bidding I submit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This most afflicts me, that departing hence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As from his face I shall be hid, deprivd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His blessed count’nance; here I could frequent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With worship, place by place where he voutsaf’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Presence Divine, and to my Sons relate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On this Mount he appeerd, under this Tree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stood visible, among these Pines his voice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I heard, here with him at this Fountain talk’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So many grateful Altars I would reare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of grassie Terfe, and pile up every Stone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of lustre from the brook, in memorie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or monument to Ages, and thereon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Offer sweet smelling Gumms &amp; Fruits and Flours:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In yonder nether World where shall I seek</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His bright appearances, or footstep trace?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though I fled him angrie, yet recall’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To life prolongd and promisd Race, I now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of glory, and farr off his steps adore.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Michael</i> with regard benigne.</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Adam</i>, thou know’st Heav’n his, and all the Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not this Rock onely; his Omnipresence fills</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Land, Sea, and Aire, and every kinde that lives,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fomented by his virtual power and warmd:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All th’ Earth he gave thee to possess and rule,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No despicable gift; surmise not then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His presence to these narrow bounds confin’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Paradise or <i>Eden</i>: this had been</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perhaps thy Capital Seate, from whence had spred</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All generations, and had hither come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From all the ends of th’ Earth, to celebrate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And reverence thee thir great Progenitor.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But this praeeminence thou hast lost, brought down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To dwell on eeven ground now with thy Sons:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet doubt not but in Vallie and in Plaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God is as here, and will be found alike</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Present, and of his presence many a signe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still following thee, still compassing thee round</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With goodness and paternal Love, his Face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Express, and of his steps the track Divine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which that thou mayst beleeve, and be confirmd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere thou from hence depart, know I am sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To shew thee what shall come in future dayes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thee and to thy Ofspring; good with bad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Expect to hear, supernal Grace contending</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With sinfulness of Men; thereby to learn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>True patience, and to temper joy with fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pious sorrow, equally enur’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By moderation either state to beare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Safest thy life, and best prepar’d endure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy mortal passage when it comes. Ascend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Hill; let <i>Eve</i> (for I have drencht her eyes)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here sleep below while thou to foresight wak’st,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As once thou slepst, while Shee to life was formd.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Adam</i> gratefully repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide, the path</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou lead’st me, and to the hand of Heav’n submit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>However chast’ning, to the evil turne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My obvious breast, arming to overcom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By suffering, and earne rest from labour won,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If so I may attain. So both ascend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the Visions of God: It was a Hill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Paradise the highest, from whose top</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Hemisphere of Earth in cleerest Ken</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stretcht out to amplest reach of prospect lay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not higher that Hill nor wider looking round,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereon for different cause the Tempter set</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our second <i>Adam</i> in the Wilderness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To shew him all Earths Kingdomes and thir Glory.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Eye might there command wherever stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>City of old or modern Fame, the Seat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of mightiest Empire, from the destind Walls</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Cambalu</i>, seat of <i>Cathaian Can</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And <i>Samarchand</i> by <i>Oxus</i>, <i>Temirs</i> Throne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To <i>Paquin</i> of <i>Sinaean</i> Kings, and thence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To <i>Agra</i> and <i>Lahor</i> of great <i>Mogul</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down to the golden <i>Chersones</i>, or where</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The <i>Persian</i> in <i>Ecbatan</i> sate, or since</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In <i>Hispahan</i>, or where the <i>Russian Ksar</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>In <i>Mosco</i>, or the Sultan in <i>Bizance</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Turchestan</i>-born; nor could his eye not ken</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Empire of <i>Negus</i> to his utmost Port</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Ercoco</i> and the less Maritine Kings</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Mombaza</i>, and <i>Quiloa</i>, and <i>Melind</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And <i>Sofala</i> thought <i>Ophir</i>, to the Realme</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Congo</i>, and <i>Angola</i> fardest South;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or thence from <i>Niger</i> Flood to <i>Atlas</i> Mount</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Kingdoms of <i>Almansor</i>, <i>Fez</i>, and <i>Sus</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Marocco</i> and <i>Algiers</i>, and <i>Tremisen</i>;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On <i>Europe</i> thence, and where <i>Rome</i> was to sway</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The VVorld: in Spirit perhaps he also saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rich <i>Mexico</i> the seat of <i>Motezume</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And <i>Cusco</i> in <i>Peru</i>, the richer seat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Atabalipa</i>, and yet unspoil’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Guiana</i>, whose great Citie <i>Geryons</i> Sons</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Call <i>El Dorado:</i> but to nobler sights</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Michael</i> from <i>Adams</i> eyes the Filme remov’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVhich that false Fruit that promis’d clearer sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had bred; then purg’d with Euphrasie and Rue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The visual Nerve, for he had much to see;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from the VVell of Life three drops instill’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So deep the power of these Ingredients pierc’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eevn to the inmost seat of mental sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That <i>Adam</i> now enforc’t to close his eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sunk down and all his Spirits became intranst:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But him the gentle Angel by the hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soon rais’d, and his attention thus recall’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Adam</i>, now ope thine eyes, and first behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ effects which thy original crime hath wrought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In some to spring from thee, who never touch’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ excepted Tree, nor with the Snake conspir’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor sinn’d thy sin, yet from that sin derive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>His eyes he op’nd, and beheld a field,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Part arable and tilth, whereon were Sheaves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>New reapt, the other part sheep-walks and foulds;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ith’ midst an Altar as the Land-mark stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rustic, of grassie sord; thither anon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sweatie Reaper from his Tillage brought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First Fruits, the green Eare, and the yellow Sheaf,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Uncull’d, as came to hand; a Shepherd next</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More meek came with the Firstlings of his Flock</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Choicest and best; then sacrificing, laid</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Inwards and thir Fat, with Incense strew’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the cleft Wood, and all due Rites perform’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Offring soon propitious Fire from Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Consum’d with nimble glance, and grateful steame;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The others not, for his was not sincere;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereat hee inlie rag’d, and as they talk’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smote him into the Midriff with a stone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That beat out life; he fell, and deadly pale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Groand out his Soul with gushing bloud effus’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much at that sight was <i>Adam</i> in his heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dismai’d, and thus in haste to th’ Angel cri’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O Teacher, some great mischief hath befall’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To that meek man, who well had sacrific’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is Pietie thus and pure Devotion paid?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>T’ whom <i>Michael</i> thus, hee also mov’d, repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These two are Brethren, <i>Adam</i>, and to come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of thy loyns; th’ unjust the just hath slain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For envie that his Brothers Offering found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Heav’n acceptance; but the bloodie Fact</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will be aveng’d, and th’ others Faith approv’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Loose no reward, though here thou see him die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rowling in dust and gore. To which our Sire.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Alas, both for the deed and for the cause!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But have I now seen Death? Is this the way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I must return to native dust? O sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Michael</i>. Death thou hast seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In his first shape on man; but many shapes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Death, and many are the wayes that lead</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To his grim Cave, all dismal; yet to sense</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More terrible at th’ entrance then within.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some, as thou saw’st, by violent stroke shall die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Fire, Flood, Famin, by Intemperance more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Meats and Drinks, which on the Earth shal bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before thee shall appear; that thou mayst know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What miserie th’ inabstinence of <i>Eve</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall bring on men. Immediately a place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before his eyes appeard, sad, noysom, dark,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Lazar-house it seemd, wherein were laid</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Numbers of all diseas’d, all maladies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of gastly Spasm, or racking torture, qualmes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of heart-sick Agonie, all feavorous kinds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Intestin Stone and Ulcer, Colic pangs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dropsies, and Asthma’s, and Joint-racking Rheums.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dire was the tossing, deep the groans, despair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tended the sick busiest from Couch to Couch;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And over them triumphant Death his Dart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shook, but delaid to strike, though oft invok’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With vows, as thir chief good, and final hope.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sight so deform what heart of Rock could long</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drie-ey’d behold? <i>Adam</i> could not, but wept,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though not of Woman born; compassion quell’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His best of Man, and gave him up to tears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A space, till firmer thoughts restraind excess,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And scarce recovering words his plaint renew’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O miserable Mankind, to what fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Degraded, to what wretched state reserv’d?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Better end heer unborn. Why is life giv’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be thus wrested from us? rather why</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Obtruded on us thus? who if we knew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What we receive, would either not accept</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Life offer’d, or soon beg to lay it down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glad to be so dismist in peace. Can thus</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Image of God in man created once</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So goodly and erect, though faultie since,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To such unsightly sufferings be debas’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Retaining still Divine similitude</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In part, from such deformities be free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for his Makers Image sake exempt?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thir Makers Image, answerd <i>Michael</i>, then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forsook them, when themselves they villifi’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To serve ungovern’d appetite, and took</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Image whom they serv’d, a brutish vice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inductive mainly to the sin of <i>Eve</i>.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore so abject is thir punishment,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but thir own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or if his likeness, by themselves defac’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To loathsom sickness, worthily, since they</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gods Image did not reverence in themselves.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I yeild it just, said <i>Adam</i>, and submit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But is there yet no other way, besides</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These painful passages, how we may come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Death, and mix with our connatural dust?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There is, said <i>Michael</i>, if thou well observe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The rule of not too much, by temperance taught</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In what thou eatst and drinkst, seeking from thence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till many years over thy head return:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So maist thou live, till like ripe Fruit thou drop</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into thy Mothers lap, or be with ease</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gatherd, not harshly pluckt, for death mature:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is old age; but then thou must outlive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To witherd weak &amp; gray; thy Senses then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forgoe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To what thou hast, and for the Aire of youth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reigne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A melancholly damp of cold and dry</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To waigh thy spirits down, and last consume</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Balme of Life. To whom our Ancestor.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Henceforth I flie not Death, nor would prolong</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Life much, bent rather how I may be quit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which I must keep till my appointed day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of rendring up. <i>Michael</i> to him repli’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Nor love thy Life, nor hate; but what thou livst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Live well, how long or short permit to Heav’n:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now prepare thee for another sight.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He lookd and saw a spacious Plaine, whereon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were Tents of various hue; by some were herds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Cattel grazing: others, whence the sound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Instruments that made melodious chime</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was heard, of Harp and Organ; and who moovd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir stops and chords was seen: his volant touch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instinct through all proportions low and high</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fled and pursu’d transverse the resonant fugue.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In other part stood one who at the Forge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Labouring, two massie clods of Iron and Brass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had melted (whether found where casual fire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had wasted woods on Mountain or in Vale,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To som Caves mouth, or whether washt by stream</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From underground) the liquid Ore he dreind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into fit moulds prepar’d; from which he formd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First his own Tooles; then, what might else be wrought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fulfil or grav’n in mettle. After these,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But on the hether side a different sort</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From the high neighbouring Hills, which was thir Seat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down to the Plain descended: by thir guise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Just men they seemd, and all thir study bent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To worship God aright, and know his works</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not hid, nor those things lost which might preserve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Freedom and Peace to men: they on the Plain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long had not walkt, when from the Tents behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Beavie of fair Women, richly gay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Gems and wanton dress; to the Harp they sung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soft amorous Ditties, and in dance came on:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Men though grave, ey’d them, and let thir eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rove without rein, till in the amorous Net</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fast caught, they lik’d, and each his liking chose;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now of love they treat till th’ Eevning Star</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Loves Harbinger appeerd; then all in heat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They light the Nuptial Torch, and bid invoke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hymen, then first to marriage Rites invok’t;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Feast and Musick all the Tents resound.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such happy interview and fair event</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of love &amp; youth not lost, Songs, Garlands, Flours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And charming Symphonies attach’d the heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Adam</i>, soon enclin’d to admit delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bent of Nature; which he thus express’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much better seems this Vision, and more hope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of peaceful dayes portends, then those two past;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here Nature seems fulfilld in all her ends.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Michael</i>. Judg not what is best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By pleasure, though to Nature seeming meet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Created, as thou art, to nobler end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Holie and pure, conformitie divine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those Tents thou sawst so pleasant, were the Tents</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his Race</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who slew his Brother; studious they appere</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Arts that polish Life, Inventers rare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unmindful of thir Maker, though his Spirit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledg’d none.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet they a beauteous ofspring shall beget;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that fair femal Troop thou sawst, that seemd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet empty of all good wherein consists</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Womans domestic honour and chief praise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bred onely and completed to the taste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of lustful apperence, to sing, to dance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To dress, and troule the Tongue, and roule the Eye.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To these that sober Race of Men, whose lives</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Religious titl’d them the Sons of God,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall yeild up all thir vertue, all thir fame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of these fair Atheists, and now swim in joy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Erelong to swim at larg) and laugh; for which</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world erelong a world of tears must weepe.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Adam</i> of short joy bereft.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O pittie and shame, that they who to live well</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enterd so faire, should turn aside to tread</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But still I see the tenor of Mans woe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>From Mans effeminate slackness it begins,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Said th’ Angel, who should better hold his place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By wisdome, and superiour gifts receavd.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But now prepare thee for another Scene.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He lookd and saw wide Territorie spred</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before him, Towns, and rural works between,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cities of Men with lofty Gates and Towrs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Concours in Arms, fierce Faces threatning Warr,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Giants of mightie Bone, and bould emprise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Part wield thir Arms, part courb the foaming Steed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Single or in Array of Battel rang’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both Horse and Foot, nor idely mustring stood;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One way a Band select from forage drives</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A herd of Beeves, faire Oxen and faire Kine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From a fat Meddow ground; or fleecy Flock,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ewes and thir bleating Lambs over the Plaine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir Bootie; scarce with Life the Shepherds flye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But call in aide, which tacks a bloody Fray;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With cruel Tournament the Squadrons joine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where Cattel pastur’d late, now scatterd lies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Carcasses and Arms th’ ensanguind Field</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deserted: Others to a Citie strong</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lay Siege, encampt; by Batterie, Scale, and Mine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assaulting; others from the Wall defend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Dart and Jav’lin, Stones and sulfurous Fire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In other part the scepter’d Haralds call</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Council in the Citie Gates: anon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grey-headed men and grave, with Warriours mixt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assemble, and Harangues are heard, but soon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In factious opposition, till at last</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of middle Age one rising, eminent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In wise deport, spake much of Right and Wrong,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Justice, of Religion, Truth and Peace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Judgement from above: him old and young</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Exploded, and had seiz’d with violent hands,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had not a Cloud descending snatch’d him thence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unseen amid the throng: so violence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Proceeded, and Oppression, and Sword-Law</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through all the Plain, and refuge none was found.</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Adam</i> was all in tears, and to his guide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lamenting turnd full sad; O what are these,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deaths Ministers, not Men, who thus deal Death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inhumanly to men, and multiply</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ten thousand fould the sin of him who slew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Brother; for of whom such massacher</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make they but of thir Brethren, men of men?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But who was that Just Man, whom had not Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rescu’d, had in his Righteousness bin lost?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Michael</i>; These are the product</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of those ill-mated Marriages thou saw’st;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where good with bad were matcht, who of themselves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Abhor to joyn; and by imprudence mixt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Produce prodigious Births of bodie or mind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such were these Giants, men of high renown;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For in those dayes Might onely shall be admir’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Valour and Heroic Vertu call’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To overcome in Battel, and subdue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of human Glorie, and for Glorie done</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of triumph, to be styl’d great Conquerours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Patrons of Mankind, Gods, and Sons of Gods,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Destroyers rightlier call’d and Plagues of men.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus Fame shall be achiev’d, renown on Earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what most merits fame in silence hid.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But hee the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The onely righteous in a World perverse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore hated, therefore so beset</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Foes for daring single to be just,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And utter odious Truth, that God would come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To judge them with his Saints: Him the most High</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rapt in a balmie Cloud with winged Steeds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did, as thou sawst, receave, to walk with God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>High in Salvation and the Climes of bliss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Exempt from Death; to shew thee what reward</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Awaits the good, the rest what punishment;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He look’d, &amp; saw the face of things quite chang’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The brazen Throat of Warr had ceast to roar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All now was turn’d to jollitie and game,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To luxurie and riot, feast and dance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Marrying or prostituting, as befell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rape or Adulterie, where passing faire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Allurd them; thence from Cups to civil Broiles.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At length a Reverend Sire among them came,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of thir doings great dislike declar’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And testifi’d against thir wayes; hee oft</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Frequented thir Assemblies, whereso met,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Triumphs or Festivals, and to them preachd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conversion and Repentance, as to Souls</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In prison under Judgements imminent:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceas’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Contending, and remov’d his Tents farr off;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then from the Mountain hewing Timber tall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Began to build a Vessel of huge bulk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Measur’d by Cubit, length, &amp; breadth, and highth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smeard round with Pitch, and in the side a dore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Contriv’d, and of provisions laid in large</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Man and Beast: when loe a wonder strange!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of everie Beast, and Bird, and Insect small</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Came seavens, and pairs, and enterd in, as taught</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir order; last the Sire, and his three Sons</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With thir four Wives, and God made fast the dore.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meanwhile the Southwind rose, &amp; with black wings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wide hovering, all the Clouds together drove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From under Heav’n; the Hills to their supplie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vapour, and Exhalation dusk and moist,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sent up amain; and now the thick’nd Skie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a dark Ceeling stood; down rush’d the Rain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impetuous, and continu’d till the Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No more was seen; the floating Vessel swum</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Uplifted; and secure with beaked prow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rode tilting o’re the Waves, all dwellings else</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flood overwhelmd, and them with all thir pomp</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deep under water rould; Sea cover’d Sea,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sea without shoar; and in thir Palaces</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where luxurie late reign’d, Sea-monsters whelp’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stabl’d; of Mankind, so numerous late,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All left, in one small bottom swum imbark’t.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How didst thou grieve then, <i>Adam</i>, to behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The end of all thy Ofspring, end so sad,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Depopulation; thee another Floud,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of tears and sorrow a Floud thee also drown’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sunk thee as thy Sons; till gently reard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By th’ Angel, on thy feet thou stoodst at last,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though comfortless, as when a Father mourns</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Childern, all in view destroyd at once;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And scarce to th’ Angel utterdst thus thy plaint.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O Visions ill foreseen! better had I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Liv’d ignorant of future, so had borne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My part of evil onely, each dayes lot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Anough to bear; those now, that were dispenst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The burd’n of many Ages, on me light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At once, by my foreknowledge gaining Birth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Abortive, to torment me ere thir being,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With thought that they must be. Let no man seek</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him or his Childern, evil he may be sure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which neither his foreknowing can prevent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hee the future evil shall no less</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In apprehension then in substance feel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man is not whom to warne: those few escap’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Famin and anguish will at last consume</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wandring that watrie Desert: I had hope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When violence was ceas’t, and Warr on Earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All would have then gon well, peace would have crownd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With length of happy days the race of man;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I was farr deceav’d; for now I see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Peace to corrupt no less then Warr to waste.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How comes it thus? unfould, Celestial Guide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whether here the Race of man will end.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Michael</i>. Those whom last thou sawst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First seen in acts of prowess eminent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And great exploits, but of true vertu void;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who having spilt much blood, and don much waste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Subduing Nations, and achievd thereby</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fame in the World, high titles, and rich prey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall change thir course to pleasure, ease, and sloth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Surfet, and lust, till wantonness and pride</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Raise out of friendship hostil deeds in Peace.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The conquerd also, and enslav’d by Warr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall with thir freedom lost all vertu loose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And feare of God, from whom thir pietie feign’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In sharp contest of Battel found no aide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against invaders; therefore coold in zeale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Worldlie or dissolute, on what thir Lords</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall leave them to enjoy; for th’ Earth shall bear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More then anough, that temperance may be tri’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So all shall turn degenerate, all deprav’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Justice and Temperance, Truth and Faith forgot;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One Man except, the onely Son of light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a dark Age, against example good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against allurement, custom, and a World</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Offended; fearless of reproach and scorn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or violence, hee of thir wicked wayes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall them admonish, and before them set</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The paths of righteousness, how much more safe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And full of peace, denouncing wrauth to come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On thir impenitence; and shall returne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of them derided, but of God observd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The one just Man alive; by his command</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall build a wondrous Ark, as thou beheldst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To save himself and houshold from amidst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A World devote to universal rack.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No sooner hee with them of Man and Beast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Select for life shall in the Ark be lodg’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shelterd round, but all the Cataracts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Heav’n set open on the Earth shall powre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Raine day and night, all fountaines of the Deep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Broke up, shall heave the Ocean to usurp</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above the highest Hills: then shall this Mount</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Paradise by might of Waves be moovd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of his place, pushd by the horned floud,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With all his verdure spoil’d, and Trees adrift</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down the great River to the op’ning Gulf,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there take root an Iland salt and bare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The haunt of Seales and Orcs, and Sea-mews clang.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To teach thee that God attributes to place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No sanctitie, if none be thither brought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Men who there frequent, or therein dwell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now what further shall ensue, behold.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He lookd, and saw the Ark hull on the floud,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which now abated, for the Clouds were fled,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drivn by a keen North-winde, that blowing drie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wrinkl’d the face of Deluge, as decai’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the cleer Sun on his wide watrie Glass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gaz’d hot, and of the fresh Wave largely drew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As after thirst, which made thir flowing shrink</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From standing lake to tripping ebbe, that stole</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With soft foot towards the deep, who now had stopt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Sluces, as the Heav’n his windows shut.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Ark no more now flotes, but seems on ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fast on the top of som high mountain fixt.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now the tops of Hills as Rocks appeer;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With clamor thence the rapid Currents drive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Towards the retreating Sea thir furious tyde.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forthwith from out the Arke a Raven flies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And after him, the surer messenger,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Dove sent forth once and agen to spie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Green Tree or ground whereon his foot may light;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The second time returning, in his Bill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An Olive leafe he brings, pacific signe:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Anon drie ground appeers, and from his Arke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ancient Sire descends with all his Train;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grateful to Heav’n, over his head beholds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A dewie Cloud, and in the Cloud a Bow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conspicuous with three lifted colours gay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Betok’ning peace from God, and Cov’nant new.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereat the heart of <i>Adam</i> erst so sad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Greatly rejoyc’d, and thus his joy broke forth.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O thou that future things canst represent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As present, Heav’nly instructer, I revive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At this last sight, assur’d that Man shall live</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With all the Creatures, and thir seed preserve.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farr less I now lament for one whole World</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of wicked Sons destroyd, then I rejoyce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For one Man found so perfet and so just,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That God voutsafes to raise another World</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From him, and all his anger to forget.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But say, what mean those colourd streaks in Heavn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Distended as the Brow of God appeas’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or serve they as a flourie verge to binde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fluid skirts of that same watrie Cloud,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Least it again dissolve and showr the Earth?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom th’ Archangel. Dextrously thou aim’st;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So willingly doth God remit his Ire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though late repenting him of Man deprav’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Griev’d at his heart, when looking down he saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The whole Earth fill’d with violence, and all flesh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corrupting each thir way; yet those remoov’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such grace shall one just Man find in his sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he relents, not to blot out mankind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And makes a Covenant never to destroy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Earth again by flood, nor let the Sea</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Surpass his bounds, nor Rain to drown the World</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Man therein or Beast; but when he brings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over the Earth a Cloud, will therein set</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His triple-colour’d Bow, whereon to look</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And call to mind his Cov’nant: Day and Night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seed time and Harvest, Heat and hoary Frost</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall hold thir course, till fire purge all things new,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both Heav’n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus thou hast seen one World begin and end;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Man as from a second stock proceed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much thou hast yet to see, but I perceave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy mortal sight to faile; objects divine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must needs impaire and wearie human sense:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Henceforth what is to com I will relate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou therefore give due audience, and attend.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This second sours of Men, while yet but few,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And while the dread of judgement past remains</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fresh in thir mindes, fearing the Deitie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With some regard to what is just and right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall lead thir lives, and multiplie apace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Labouring the soile, and reaping plenteous crop,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corn wine and oyle; and from the herd or flock,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oft sacrificing Bullock, Lamb, or Kid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With large Wine-offerings pour’d, and sacred Feast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shal spend thir dayes in joy unblam’d, and dwell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long time in peace by Families and Tribes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under paternal rule; till one shall rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of proud ambitious heart, who not content</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With fair equalitie, fraternal state,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will arrogate Dominion undeserv’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over his brethren, and quite dispossess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Concord and law of Nature from the Earth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hunting (and Men not Beasts shall be his game)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Warr and hostile snare such as refuse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Subjection to his Empire tyrannous:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A mightie Hunter thence he shall be styl’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before the Lord, as in despite of Heav’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or from Heav’n claming second Sovrantie;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from Rebellion shall derive his name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though of Rebellion others he accuse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hee with a crew, whom like Ambition joyns</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With him or under him to tyrannize,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Marching from <i>Eden</i> towards the West, shall finde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Boiles out from under ground, the mouth of Hell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Brick, and of that stuff they cast to build</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Citie &amp; Towre, whose top may reach to Heav’n;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And get themselves a name, least far disperst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In foraign Lands thir memorie be lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Regardless whether good or evil fame.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But God who oft descends to visit men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unseen, and through thir habitations walks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mark thir doings, them beholding soon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Comes down to see thir Citie, ere the Tower</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Obstruct Heav’n Towrs, and in derision sets</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon thir Tongues a various Spirit to rase</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quite out thir Native Language, and instead</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sow a jangling noise of words unknown:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the Builders; each to other calls</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not understood, till hoarse, and all in rage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As mockt they storm; great laughter was in Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And looking down, to see the hubbub strange</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hear the din; thus was the building left</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ridiculous, and the work Confusion nam’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Whereto thus <i>Adam</i> fatherly displeas’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O execrable Son so to aspire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above his Brethren, to himself affirming</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Authoritie usurpt, from God not giv’n:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He gave us onely over Beast, Fish, Fowl</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dominion absolute; that right we hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By his donation; but Man over men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He made not Lord; such title to himself</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reserving, human left from human free.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But this Usurper his encroachment proud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stayes not on Man; to God his Tower intends</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Siege and defiance: Wretched man! what food</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will he convey up thither to sustain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Himself and his rash Armie, where thin Aire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above the Clouds will pine his entrails gross,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And famish him of Breath, if not of Bread?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Michael</i>. Justly thou abhorr’st</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Son, who on the quiet state of men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rational Libertie; yet know withall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since thy original lapse, true Libertie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is lost, which alwayes with right Reason dwells</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Twinn’d, and from her hath no dividual being:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reason in man obscur’d, or not obeyd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Immediately inordinate desires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And upstart Passions catch the Government</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Reason, and to servitude reduce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man till then free. Therefore since hee permits</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within himself unworthie Powers to reign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over free Reason, God in Judgement just</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Subjects him from without to violent Lords;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who oft as undeservedly enthrall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His outward freedom: Tyrannie must be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though to the Tyrant thereby no excuse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet somtimes Nations will decline so low</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From vertue, which is reason, that no wrong,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Justice, and some fatal curse annext</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deprives them of thir outward libertie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir inward lost: Witness th’ irreverent Son</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of him who built the Ark, who for the shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Don to his Father, heard this heavie curse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Servant of Servants</i>, on his vitious Race.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus will this latter, as the former World,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still tend from bad to worse, till God at last</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His presence from among them, and avert</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His holy Eyes; resolving from thenceforth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To leave them to thir own polluted wayes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And one peculiar Nation to select</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From all the rest, of whom to be invok’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Nation from one faithful man to spring:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him on this side <i>Euphrates</i> yet residing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bred up in Idol-worship; O that men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Canst thou believe?) should be so stupid grown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While yet the Patriark liv’d, who scap’d the Flood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As to forsake the living God, and fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To-worship thir own work in Wood and Stone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Gods! yet him God the most High voutsafes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To call by Vision from his Fathers house,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His kindred and false Gods, into a Land</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which he will shew him, and from him will raise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A mightie Nation, and upon him showre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His benediction so, that in his Seed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Nations shall be blest; hee straight obeys,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not knowing to what Land, yet firm believes:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I see him, but thou canst not, with what Faith</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He leaves his Gods, his Friends, and native Soile</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Ur</i> of <i>Chaldaea</i>, passing now the Ford</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To <i>Haran</i>, after him a cumbrous Train</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Herds and Flocks, and numerous servitude;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not wandring poor, but trusting all his wealth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With God, who call’d him, in a land unknown.</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Canaan</i> he now attains, I see his Tents</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pitcht about <i>Sechem</i>, and the neighbouring Plaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Moreb</i> there by promise he receaves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gift to his Progenie of all that Land;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From <i>Hamath</i> Northward to the Desert South</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Things by thir names I call, though yet unnam’d)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From <i>Hermon</i> East to the great Western Sea,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mount <i>Hermon</i>, yonder Sea, each place behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In prospect, as I point them; on the shoare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mount <i>Carmel</i>; here the double-founted stream</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Jordan</i>, true limit Eastward; but his Sons</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall dwell to <i>Senir</i>, that long ridge of Hills.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This ponder, that all Nations of the Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall in his Seed be blessed; by that Seed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is meant thy great deliverer, who shall bruise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Serpents head; whereof to thee anon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Plainlier shall be reveald. This Patriarch blest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom <i>Faithful Abraham</i> due time shall call,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Son, and of his Son a Grand-childe leaves,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Grandchilde with twelve Sons increast, departs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From <i>Canaan</i>, to a Land hereafter call’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Egypt</i>, divided by the River <i>Nile</i>;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See where it flows, disgorging at seaven mouthes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the Sea: to sojourn in that Land</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He comes invited by a yonger Son</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In time of dearth, a Son whose worthy deeds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Raise him to be the second in that Realme</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Pharao</i>: there he dies, and leaves his Race</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Growing into a Nation, and now grown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Suspected to a sequent King, who seeks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To stop thir overgrowth, as inmate guests</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too numerous; whence of guests he makes them slaves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inhospitably, and kills thir infant Males:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till by two brethren (those two brethren call</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Moses</i> and <i>Aaron</i>) sent from God to claime</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His people from enthralment, they return</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With glory and spoile back to thir promis’d Land.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But first the lawless Tyrant, who denies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To know thir God, or message to regard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must be compelld by Signes and Judgements dire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To blood unshed the Rivers must be turnd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Frogs, Lice and Flies must all his Palace fill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With loath’d intrusion, and fill all the land;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Cattel must of Rot and Murren die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Botches and blaines must all his flesh imboss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all his people; Thunder mixt with Haile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Haile mixt with fire must rend th’ <i>Egyptian</i> Skie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wheel on th’ Earth, devouring where it rouls;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What it devours not, Herb, or Fruit, or Graine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A darksom Cloud of Locusts swarming down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing green:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Darkness must overshadow all his bounds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Palpable darkness, and blot out three dayes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Last with one midnight stroke all the first-born</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Egypt</i> must lie dead. Thus with ten wounds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This River-dragon tam’d at length submits</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To let his sojourners depart, and oft</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Humbles his stubborn heart, but still as Ice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More hard’nd after thaw, till in his rage</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pursuing whom he late dismissd, the Sea</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Swallows him with his Host, but them lets pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As on drie land between two christal walls,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aw’d by the rod of <i>Moses</i> so to stand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divided, till his rescu’d gain thir shoar:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such wondrous power God to his Saint will lend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though present in his Angel, who shall goe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before them in a Cloud, and Pillar of Fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To guide them in thir journey, and remove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Behinde them, while th’ obdurat King pursues:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All night he will pursue, but his approach</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Darkness defends between till morning Watch;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then through the Firey Pillar and the Cloud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God looking forth will trouble all his Host</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And craze thir Chariot wheels: when by command</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Moses</i> once more his potent Rod extends</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over the Sea; the Sea his Rod obeys;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On thir imbattelld ranks the Waves return,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And overwhelm thir Warr: the Race elect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Safe towards <i>Canaan</i> from the shoar advance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through the wilde Desert, not the readiest way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Least entring on the <i>Canaanite</i> allarmd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Warr terrifie them inexpert, and feare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Return them back to <i>Egypt</i>, choosing rather</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inglorious life with servitude; for life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To noble and ignoble is more sweet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Untraind in Armes, where rashness leads not on.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This also shall they gain by thir delay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the wide Wilderness, there they shall found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir government, and thir great Senate choose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through the twelve Tribes, to rule by Laws ordaind:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God from the Mount of <i>Sinai</i>, whose gray top</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall tremble, he descending, will himself</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Thunder Lightning and loud Trumpets sound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ordaine them Lawes; part such as appertaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To civil Justice, part religious Rites</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sacrifice, informing them, by types</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shadowes, of that destind Seed to bruise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Serpent, by what meanes he shall achieve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mankinds deliverance. But the voice of God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mortal eare is dreadful; they beseech</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That <i>Moses</i> might report to them his will,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And terror cease; he grants them thir desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instructed that to God is no access</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without Mediator, whose high Office now</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Moses</i> in figure beares, to introduce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One greater, of whose day he shall foretell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the Prophets in thir Age the times</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of great <i>Messiah</i> shall sing. Thus Laws and Rites</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Establisht, such delight hath God in Men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Obedient to his will, that he voutsafes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among them to set up his Tabernacle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The holy One with mortal Men to dwell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By his prescript a Sanctuary is fram’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Cedar, overlaid with Gold, therein</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An Ark, and in the Ark his Testimony,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Records of his Cov’nant, over these</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Mercie-seat of Gold between the wings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of two bright Cherubim, before him burn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seaven Lamps as in a Zodiac representing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Heav’nly fires; over the Tent a Cloud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall rest by Day, a fierie gleame by Night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save when they journie, and at length they come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conducted by his Angel to the Land</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Promisd to <i>Abraham</i> and his Seed: the rest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were long to tell, how many Battels fought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How many Kings destroyd, and Kingdoms won,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or how the Sun shall in mid Heav’n stand still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A day entire, and Nights due course adjourne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mans voice commanding, Sun in <i>Gibeon</i> stand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou Moon in the vale of <i>Aialon</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till <i>Israel</i> overcome; so call the third</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From <i>Abraham</i>, Son of <i>Isaac</i>, and from him</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His whole descent, who thus shall <i>Canaan</i> win.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Here <i>Adam</i> interpos’d. O sent from Heav’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enlightner of my darkness, gracious things</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hast reveald, those chiefly which concerne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Just <i>Abraham</i> and his Seed: now first I finde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mine eyes true op’ning, and my heart much eas’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Erwhile perplext with thoughts what would becom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of mee and all Mankind; but now I see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His day, in whom all Nations shall be blest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Favour unmerited by me, who sought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forbidd’n knowledge by forbidd’n means.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This yet I apprehend not, why to those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among whom God will deigne to dwell on Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So many and so various Laws are giv’n;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So many Laws argue so many sins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among them; how can God with such reside?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Michael</i>. Doubt not but that sin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will reign among them, as of thee begot;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore was Law given them to evince</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir natural pravitie, by stirring up</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sin against Law to fight; that when they see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Law can discover sin, but not remove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save by those shadowie expiations weak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bloud of Bulls and Goats, they may conclude</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some bloud more precious must be paid for Man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Just for unjust, that in such righteousness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To them by Faith imputed, they may finde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Justification towards God, and peace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Conscience, which the Law by Ceremonies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cannot appease, nor Man the moral part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perform, and not performing cannot live.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So Law appears imperfet, and but giv’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With purpose to resign them in full time</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up to a better Cov’nant, disciplin’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From shadowie Types to Truth, from Flesh to Spirit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From imposition of strict Laws, to free</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Acceptance of large Grace, from servil fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To filial, works of Law to works of Faith.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore shall not <i>Moses</i>, though of God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Highly belov’d, being but the Minister</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Law, his people into <i>Canaan</i> lead;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But <i>Joshua</i> whom the Gentiles <i>Jesus</i> call,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Name and Office bearing, who shall quell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The adversarie Serpent, and bring back</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through the worlds wilderness long wanderd man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Safe to eternal Paradise of rest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meanwhile they in thir earthly <i>Canaan</i> plac’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long time shall dwell and prosper, but when sins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>National interrupt thir public peace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Provoking God to raise them enemies:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From whom as oft he saves them penitent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Judges first, then under Kings; of whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The second, both for pietie renownd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Irrevocable, that his Regal Throne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ever shall endure; the like shall sing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Prophecie, That of the Royal Stock</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>David</i> (so I name this King) shall rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Son, the Womans Seed to thee foretold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Foretold to <i>Abraham</i>, as in whom shall trust</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Nations, and to Kings foretold, of Kings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The last, for of his Reign shall be no end.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But first a long succession must ensue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And his next Son for Wealth and Wisdom fam’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The clouded Ark of God till then in Tents</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wandring, shall in a glorious Temple enshrine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such follow him, as shall be registerd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Part good, part bad, of bad the longer scrowle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose foul Idolatries, and other faults</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heapt to the popular summe, will so incense</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God, as to leave them, and expose thir Land,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir Citie, his Temple, and his holy Ark</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To that proud Citie, whose high Walls thou saw’st</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Left in confusion, <i>Babylon</i> thence call’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There in captivitie he lets them dwell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The space of seventie years, then brings them back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Remembring mercie, and his Cov’nant sworn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To <i>David</i>, stablisht as the dayes of Heav’n.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Returnd from <i>Babylon</i> by leave of Kings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir Lords, whom God dispos’d, the house of God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They first re-edifie, and for a while</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In mean estate live moderate, till grown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In wealth and multitude, factious they grow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But first among the Priests dissension springs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men who attend the Altar, and should most</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Endeavour Peace: thir strife pollution brings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the Temple it self: at last they seise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Scepter, and regard not <i>Davids</i> Sons,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then loose it to a stranger, that the true</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Anointed King <i>Messiah</i> might be born</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Barr’d of his right; yet at his Birth a Starr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unseen before in Heav’n proclaims him com,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And guides the Eastern Sages, who enquire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His place, to offer Incense, Myrrh, and Gold;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His place of birth a solemn Angel tells</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To simple Shepherds, keeping watch by night;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They gladly thither haste, and by a Quire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of squadrond Angels hear his Carol sung.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Virgin is his Mother, but his Sire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Power of the most High; he shall ascend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Throne hereditarie, and bound his Reign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With earths wide bounds, his glory with the Heav’ns.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He ceas’d, discerning <i>Adam</i> with such joy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Surcharg’d, as had like grief bin dew’d in tears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without the vent of words, which these he breathd.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O Prophet of glad tidings, finisher</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of utmost hope! now clear I understand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What oft my steddiest thoughts have searcht in vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why our great expectation should be call’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The seed of Woman: Virgin Mother, Haile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>High in the love of Heav’n, yet from my Loynes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou shalt proceed, and from thy Womb the Son</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of God most High; So God with man unites.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Expect with mortal paine: say where and when</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir fight, what stroke shall bruise the Victors heel.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Michael</i>. Dream not of thir fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As of a Duel, or the local wounds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of head or heel: not therefore joynes the Son</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Manhood to God-head, with more strength to foil</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy enemie; nor so is overcome</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Satan</i>, whose fall from Heav’n, a deadlier bruise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disabl’d not to give thee thy deaths wound:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which hee, who comes thy Saviour, shall recure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not by destroying <i>Satan</i>, but his works</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In thee and in thy Seed: nor can this be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But by fulfilling that which thou didst want,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Obedience to the Law of God, impos’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On penaltie of death, and suffering death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The penaltie to thy transgression due,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And due to theirs which out of thine will grow:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So onely can high Justice rest appaid.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Law of God exact he shall fulfill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both by obedience and by love, though love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alone fulfill the Law; thy punishment</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He shall endure by coming in the Flesh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To a reproachful life and cursed death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Proclaiming Life to all who shall believe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In his redemption, and that his obedience</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imputed becomes theirs by Faith, his merits</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To save them, not thir own, though legal works.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For this he shall live hated, be blasphem’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seis’d on by force, judg’d, and to death condemnd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A shameful and accurst, naild to the Cross</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By his own Nation, slaine for bringing Life;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to the Cross he nailes thy Enemies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Law that is against thee, and the sins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all mankinde, with him there crucifi’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Never to hurt them more who rightly trust</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this his satisfaction; so he dies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But soon revives, Death over him no power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall long usurp; ere the third dawning light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Returne, the Starres of Morn shall see him rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redeems,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His death for Man, as many as offerd Life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neglect not, and the benefit imbrace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Faith not void of works: this God-like act</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Annuls thy doom, the death thou shouldst have dy’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In sin for ever lost from life; this act</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall bruise the head of <i>Satan</i>, crush his strength</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Defeating Sin and Death, his two maine armes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fix farr deeper in his head thir stings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then temporal death shall bruise the Victors heel,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or theirs whom he redeems, a death like sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A gentle wafting to immortal Life.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor after resurrection shall he stay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Longer on Earth then certaine times to appeer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To his Disciples, Men who in his Life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still follow’d him; to them shall leave in charge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To teach all nations what of him they learn’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And his Salvation, them who shall beleeve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Baptizing in the profluent streame, the signe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of washing them from guilt of sin to Life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pure, and in mind prepar’d, if so befall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For death, like that which the redeemer dy’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Nations they shall teach; for from that day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not onely to the Sons of <i>Abrahams</i> Loines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Salvation shall be Preacht, but to the Sons</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Abrahams</i> Faith wherever through the world;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So in his seed all Nations shall be blest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then to the Heav’n of Heav’ns he shall ascend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With victory, triumphing through the aire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over his foes and thine; there shall surprise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Serpent, Prince of aire, and drag in Chaines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through all his realme, &amp; there confounded leave;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then enter into glory, and resume</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Seat at Gods right hand, exalted high</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above all names in Heav’n; and thence shall come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When this worlds dissolution shall be ripe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With glory and power to judge both quick &amp; dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To judge th’ unfaithful dead, but to reward</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His faithful, and receave them into bliss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether in Heav’n or Earth, for then the Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall all be Paradise, far happier place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then this of <i>Eden</i>, and far happier daies.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake th’ Archangel <i>Michael</i>, then paus’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As at the Worlds great period; and our Sire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Replete with joy and wonder thus repli’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O goodness infinite, goodness immense!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That all this good of evil shall produce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And evil turn to good; more wonderful</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then that which by creation first brought forth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Light out of darkness! full of doubt I stand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether I should repent me now of sin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By mee done and occasiond, or rejoyce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To God more glory, more good will to Men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From God, and over wrauth grace shall abound.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But say, if our deliverer up to Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must reascend, what will betide the few</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His faithful, left among th’ unfaithful herd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The enemies of truth; who then shall guide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His people, who defend? will they not deale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wors with his followers then with him they dealt?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Be sure they will, said th’ Angel; but from Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hee to his own a Comforter will send,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The promise of the Father, who shall dwell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Spirit within them, and the Law of Faith</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Working through love, upon thir hearts shall write,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To guide them in all truth, and also arme</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With spiritual Armour, able to resist</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Satans</i> assaults, and quench his fierie darts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What Man can do against them, not affraid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though to the death, against such cruelties</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With inward consolations recompenc’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And oft supported so as shall amaze</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir proudest persecuters: for the Spirit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Powrd first on his Apostles, whom he sends</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To evangelize the Nations, then on all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Baptiz’d, shall them with wondrous gifts endue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To speak all Tongues, and do all Miracles,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As did thir Lord before them. Thus they win</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great numbers of each Nation to receave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With joy the tidings brought from Heav’n: at length</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir Ministry perform’d, and race well run,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir doctrine and thir story written left,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They die; but in thir room, as they forewarne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous Wolves,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who all the sacred mysteries of Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thir own vile advantages shall turne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of lucre and ambition, and the truth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With superstitions and traditions taint,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Left onely in those written Records pure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though not but by the Spirit understood.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Places and titles, and with these to joine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Secular power, though feigning still to act</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By spiritual, to themselves appropriating</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Spirit of God, promisd alike and giv’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all Beleevers; and from that pretense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spiritual Lawes by carnal power shall force</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On every conscience; Laws which none shall finde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Left them inrould, or what the Spirit within</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall on the heart engrave. What will they then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But force the Spirit of Grace it self, and binde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His consort Libertie; what, but unbuild</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His living Temples, built by Faith to stand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir own Faith not anothers: for on Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who against Faith and Conscience can be heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Infallible? yet many will presume:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whence heavie persecution shall arise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On all who in the worship persevere</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Spirit and Truth; the rest, farr greater part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will deem in outward Rites and specious formes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Religion satisfi’d; Truth shall retire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bestuck with slandrous darts, and works of Faith</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rarely be found: so shall the World goe on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To good malignant, to bad men benigne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under her own waight groaning, till the day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Appeer of respiration to the just,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And vengeance to the wicked, at return</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of him so lately promis’d to thy aid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Womans seed, obscurely then foretold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now amplier known thy Saviour and thy Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Last in the Clouds from Heav’n to be reveald</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In glory of the Father, to dissolve</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Satan</i> with his perverted World, then raise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From the conflagrant mass, purg’d and refin’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>New Heav’ns, new Earth, Ages of endless date</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Founded in righteousness and peace and love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To bring forth fruits Joy and eternal Bliss.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He ended; and thus <i>Adam</i> last reply’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Measur’d this transient World, the Race of time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till time stand fixt: beyond is all abyss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eternitie, whose end no eye can reach.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Greatly instructed I shall hence depart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Greatly in peace of thought, and have my fill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of knowledge, what this vessel can containe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond which was my folly to aspire.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Henceforth I learne, that to obey is best,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And love with feare the onely God, to walk</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As in his presence, ever to observe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His providence, and on him sole depend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Merciful over all his works, with good</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still overcoming evil, and by small</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accomplishing great things, by things deemd weak</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By simply meek; that suffering for Truths sake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is fortitude to highest victorie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the faithful Death the Gate of Life;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Taught this by his example whom I now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blest.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus also th’ Angel last repli’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This having learnt, thou hast attaind the summe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of wisdom; hope no higher, though all the Starrs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou knewst by name, and all th’ ethereal Powers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All secrets of the deep, all Natures works,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or works of God in Heav’n, Air, Earth, or Sea,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the riches of this World enjoydst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the rule, one Empire; onely add</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deeds to thy knowledge answerable, add Faith,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Add Vertue, Patience, Temperance, add Love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By name to come call’d Charitie, the soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Paradise within thee, happier farr.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let us descend now therefore from this top</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Speculation; for the hour precise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Exacts our parting hence; and see the Guards,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By mee encampt on yonder Hill, expect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir motion, at whose Front a flaming Sword,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In signal of remove, waves fiercely round;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her also I with gentle Dreams have calm’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Portending good, and all her spirits compos’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To meek submission: thou at season fit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let her with thee partake what thou hast heard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chiefly what may concern her Faith to know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The great deliverance by her Seed to come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For by the Womans Seed) on all Mankind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ye may live, which will be many dayes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both in one Faith unanimous though sad,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With cause for evils past, yet much more cheer’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With meditation on the happie end.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He ended, and they both descend the Hill;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Descended, <i>Adam</i> to the Bowre where <i>Eve</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lay sleeping ran before, but found her wak’t;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus with words not sad she him receav’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Whence thou returnst, &amp; whither wentst, I know;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For God is also in sleep, and Dreams advise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which he hath sent propitious, some great good</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Presaging, since with sorrow and hearts distress</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVearied I fell asleep: but now lead on;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In mee is no delay; with thee to goe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is to stay here; without thee here to stay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is to go hence unwilling; thou to mee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Art all things under Heav’n, all places thou,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVho for my wilful crime art banisht hence.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This further consolation yet secure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I carry hence; though all by mee is lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such favour I unworthie am voutsaft,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By mee the Promis’d Seed shall all restore.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake our Mother <i>Eve</i>, and <i>Adam</i> heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>VVell pleas’d, but answer’d not; for now too nigh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Archangel stood, and from the other Hill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thir fixt Station, all in bright array</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Cherubim descended; on the ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gliding meteorous, as Ev’ning Mist</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ris’n from a River o’re the marish glides,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gathers ground fast at the Labourers heel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Homeward returning. High in Front advanc’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The brandisht Sword of God before them blaz’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fierce as a Comet; which with torrid heat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And vapour as the <i>Libyan</i> Air adust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Began to parch that temperate Clime; whereat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In either hand the hastning Angel caught</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our lingring Parents, and to th’ Eastern Gate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let them direct, and down the Cliff as fast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the subjected Plaine; then disappeer’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They looking back, all th’ Eastern side beheld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Paradise, so late thir happie seat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wav’d over by that flaming Brand, the Gate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With dreadful Faces throng’d and fierie Armes:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Som natural tears they drop’d, but wip’d them soon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The World was all before them, where to choose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir place of rest, and Providence thir guide:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They hand in hand with wandring steps and slow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through <i>Eden</i> took thir solitarie way.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
