<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<p>
					<span>Hail holy light, ofspring of Heav’n first-born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or of th’ Eternal Coeternal beam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May I express thee unblam’d? since God is light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never but in unapproached light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwelt from Eternitie, dwelt then in thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright effluence of bright essence increate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hear’st thou rather pure Ethereal stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of God, as with a Mantle didst invest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rising world of waters dark and deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Won from the void and formless infinite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Escap’t the <i>Stygian</i> Pool, though long detain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through utter and through middle darkness borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With other notes then to th’ <i>Orphean</i> Lyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sung of <i>Chaos</i> and <i>Eternal Night</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taught by the heav’nly Muse to venture down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dark descent, and up to reascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though hard and rare: thee I revisit safe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feel thy sovran vital Lamp; but thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revisit’st not these eyes, that rowle in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thick a drop serene hath quencht thir Orbs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or dim suffusion veild.  Yet not the more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cleer Spring, or shadie Grove, or Sunnie Hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smit with the love of sacred song; but chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee <i>Sion</i> and the flowrie Brooks beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nightly I visit: nor somtimes forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those other two equal’d with me in Fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So were I equal’d with them in renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blind <i>Thamyris</i> and blind <i>Maeonides</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And <i>Tiresias</i> and <i>Phineus</i> Prophets old.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then feed on thoughts, that voluntarie move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful Bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sings darkling, and in shadiest Covert hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tunes her nocturnal Note.  Thus with the Year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seasons return, but not to me returns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Day, or the sweet approach of Ev’n or Morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sight of vernal bloom, or Summers Rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But cloud in stead, and ever-during dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surrounds me, from the chearful waies of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cut off, and for the book of knowledg fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presented with a Universal blanc</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Natures works to mee expung’d and ras’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wisdome at one entrance quite shut out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much the rather thou Celestial light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Irradiate, there plant eyes, all mist from thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of things invisible to mortal sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now had the Almighty Father from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the pure Empyrean where he sits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High Thron’d above all highth, bent down his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own works and their works at once to view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About him all the Sanctities of Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood thick as Starrs, and from his sight receiv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beatitude past utterance; on his right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The radiant image of his Glory sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His onely Son; On Earth he first beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our two first Parents, yet the onely two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mankind, in the happie Garden plac’t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uninterrupted joy, unrivald love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In blissful solitude; he then survey’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hell and the Gulf between, and <i>Satan</i> there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coasting the wall of Heav’n on this side Night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dun Air sublime, and ready now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the bare outside of this World, that seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firm land imbosom’d without Firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uncertain which, in Ocean or in Air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him God beholding from his prospect high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein past, present, future he beholds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus to his onely Son foreseeing spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Onely begotten Son, seest thou what rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transports our adversarie, whom no bounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prescrib’d, no barrs of Hell, nor all the chains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heapt on him there, nor yet the main Abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide interrupt can hold; so bent he seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On desperat revenge, that shall redound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his own rebellious head.  And now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all restraint broke loose he wings his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not farr off Heav’n, in the Precincts of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Directly towards the new created World,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Man there plac’t, with purpose to assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If him by force he can destroy, or worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By som false guile pervert; and shall pervert;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For man will heark’n to his glozing lyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And easily transgress the sole Command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hee and his faithless Progenie: whose fault?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of mee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All he could have; I made him just and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such I created all th’ Ethereal Powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Spirits, both them who stood &amp; them who faild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not free, what proof could they have givn sincere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of true allegiance, constant Faith or Love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where onely what they needs must do, appeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not what they would? what praise could they receive?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What pleasure I from such obedience paid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Will and Reason (Reason also is choice)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made passive both, had servd necessitie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not mee.  They therefore as to right belongd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So were created, nor can justly accuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir maker, or thir making, or thir Fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if Predestination over-rul’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir will, dispos’d by absolute Decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir own revolt, not I: if I foreknew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which had no less prov’d certain unforeknown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So without least impulse or shadow of Fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or aught by me immutablie foreseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They trespass, Authors to themselves in all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both what they judge and what they choose; for so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I formd them free, and free they must remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they enthrall themselves: I else must change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir nature, and revoke the high Decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir freedom, they themselves ordain’d thir fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first sort by thir own suggestion fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Self-tempted, self-deprav’d: Man falls deceiv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other none: in Mercy and Justice both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Heav’n and Earth, so shall my glorie excel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Mercy first and last shall brightest shine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance fill’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All Heav’n, and in the blessed Spirits elect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sense of new joy ineffable diffus’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond compare the Son of God was seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most glorious, in him all his Father shon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Substantially express’d, and in his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divine compassion visibly appeerd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love without end, and without measure Grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which uttering thus he to his Father spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Father, gracious was that word which clos’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy sovran sentence, that Man should find grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which both Heav’n and Earth shall high extoll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy praises, with th’ innumerable sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hymns and sacred Songs, wherewith thy Throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encompass’d shall resound thee ever blest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For should Man finally be lost, should Man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy creature late so lov’d, thy youngest Son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joynd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his own folly? that be from thee farr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That farr be from thee, Father, who art Judge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all things made, and judgest onely right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or shall the Adversarie thus obtain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His end, and frustrate thine, shall he fulfill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His malice, and thy goodness bring to naught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or proud return though to his heavier doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet with revenge accomplish’t and to Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draw after him the whole Race of mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By him corrupted? or wilt thou thy self</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abolish thy Creation, and unmake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him, what for thy glorie thou hast made?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So should thy goodness and thy greatness both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be questiond and blaspheam’d without defence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the great Creatour thus reply’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Son, in whom my Soul hath chief delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Son of my bosom, Son who art alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All hast thou spok’n as my thoughts are, all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As my Eternal purpose hath decreed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man shall not quite be lost, but sav’d who will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet not of will in him, but grace in me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freely voutsaft; once more I will renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthrall’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sin to foul exorbitant desires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On even ground against his mortal foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By me upheld, that he may know how frail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fall’n condition is, and to me ow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All his deliv’rance, and to none but me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some I have chosen of peculiar grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Elect above the rest; so is my will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir sinful state, and to appease betimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ incensed Deitie, while offerd grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invites; for I will cleer thir senses dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What may suffice, and soft’n stonie hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prayer, repentance, and obedience due,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though but endevord with sincere intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eare shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will place within them as a guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Umpire <i>Conscience</i>, whom if they will hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light after light well us’d they shall attain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the end persisting, safe arrive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This my long sufferance and my day of grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hard be hard’nd, blind be blinded more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they may stumble on, and deeper fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And none but such from mercy I exclude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet all is not don; Man disobeying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disloyal breaks his fealtie, and sinns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the high Supremacie of Heav’n,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affecting God-head, and so loosing all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To expiate his Treason hath naught left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to destruction sacred and devote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with his whole posteritie must die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Die hee or Justice must; unless for him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Som other able, and as willing, pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rigid satisfaction, death for death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say Heav’nly Powers, where shall we find such love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which of ye will be mortal to redeem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mans mortal crime, and just th’ unjust to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwels in all Heaven charitie so deare?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He ask’d, but all the Heav’nly Quire stood mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silence was in Heav’n: on mans behalf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patron or Intercessor none appeerd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much less that durst upon his own head draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now without redemption all mankind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must have bin lost, adjudg’d to Death and Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By doom severe, had not the Son of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whom the fulness dwels of love divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His dearest mediation thus renewd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Father, thy word is past, man shall find grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The speediest of thy winged messengers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To visit all thy creatures, and to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes unprevented, unimplor’d, unsought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happie for man, so coming; he her aide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attonement for himself or offering meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indebted and undon, hath none to bring:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold mee then, mee for him, life for life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I offer, on mee let thine anger fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Account mee man; I for his sake will leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy bosom, and this glorie next to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freely put off, and for him lastly die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well pleas’d, on me let Death wreck all his rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his gloomie power I shall not long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lie vanquisht; thou hast givn me to possess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life in my self for ever, by thee I live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though now to Death I yeild, and am his due</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that of me can die, yet that debt paid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsom grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His prey, nor suffer my unspotted Soule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever with corruption there to dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I shall rise Victorious, and subdue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Vanquisher, spoild of his vanted spoile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death his deaths wound shall then receive, &amp; stoop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inglorious, of his mortall sting disarm’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I through the ample Air in Triumph high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall lead Hell Captive maugre Hell, and show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The powers of darkness bound.  Thou at the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleas’d, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While by thee rais’d I ruin all my Foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death last, and with his Carcass glut the Grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with the multitude of my redeemd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall enter Heaven long absent, and returne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of anger shall remain, but peace assur’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reconcilement; wrauth shall be no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thenceforth, but in thy presence Joy entire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His words here ended, but his meek aspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent yet spake, and breath’d immortal love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mortal men, above which only shon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filial obedience: as a sacrifice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad to be offer’d, he attends the will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his great Father.  Admiration seis’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All Heav’n, what this might mean, &amp; whither tend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wondring; but soon th’ Almighty thus reply’d:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O thou in Heav’n and Earth the only peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found out for mankind under wrauth, O thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sole complacence! well thou know’st how dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me are all my works, nor Man the least</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though last created, that for him I spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By loosing thee a while, the whole Race lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou therefore whom thou only canst redeeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir Nature also to thy Nature joyne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be thy self Man among men on Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made flesh, when time shall be, of Virgin seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By wondrous birth: Be thou in <i>Adams</i> room</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Head of all mankind, though <i>Adams</i> Son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in him perish all men, so in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from a second root shall be restor’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many as are restor’d, without thee none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His crime makes guiltie all his Sons, thy merit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imputed shall absolve them who renounce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And live in thee transplanted, and from thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive new life.  So Man, as is most just,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall satisfie for Man, be judg’d and die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dying rise, and rising with him raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Brethren, ransomd with his own dear life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Heav’nly love shal outdoo Hellish hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giving to death, and dying to redeeme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So easily destroy’d, and still destroyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In those who, when they may, accept not grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shalt thou by descending to assume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mans Nature, less’n or degrade thine owne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because thou hast, though Thron’d in highest bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equal to God, and equally enjoying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God-like fruition, quitted all to save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A World from utter loss, and hast been found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Merit more then Birthright Son of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found worthiest to be so by being Good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farr more then Great or High; because in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love hath abounded more then Glory abounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore thy Humiliation shall exalt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thee thy Manhood also to this Throne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt Reigne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anointed universal King; all Power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I give thee, reign for ever, and assume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy Merits; under thee as Head Supream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou attended gloriously from Heav’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shalt in the Skie appeer, and from thee send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Windes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The living, and forthwith the cited dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all past Ages to the general Doom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall hast’n, such a peal shall rouse thir sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all thy Saints assembl’d, thou shalt judge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bad men and Angels, they arraignd shall sink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath thy Sentence; Hell, her numbers full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thenceforth shall be for ever shut.  Mean while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New Heav’n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after all thir tribulations long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thou thy regal Scepter shalt lay by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For regal Scepter then no more shall need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God shall be All in All.  But all ye Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adore him, who to compass all this dies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adore the Son, and honour him as mee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No sooner had th’ Almighty ceas’t, but all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The multitude of Angels with a shout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud as from numbers without number, sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heav’n rung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Jubilee, and loud Hosanna’s fill’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ eternal Regions: lowly reverent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards either Throne they bow, &amp; to the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With solemn adoration down they cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir Crowns inwove with Amarant and Gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immortal Amarant, a Flour which once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Paradise, fast by the Tree of Life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began to bloom, but soon for mans offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Heav’n remov’d where first it grew, there grows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flours aloft shading the Fount of Life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where the river of Bliss through midst of Heavn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rowls o’re <i>Elisian</i> Flours her Amber stream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With these that never fade the Spirits Elect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bind thir resplendent locks inwreath’d with beams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now in loose Garlands thick thrown off, the bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pavement that like a Sea of Jasper shon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impurpl’d with Celestial Roses smil’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Crown’d again thir gold’n Harps they took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harps ever tun’d, that glittering by their side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Quivers hung, and with Praeamble sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of charming symphonie they introduce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir sacred Song, and waken raptures high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No voice exempt, no voice but well could joine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melodious part, such concord is in Heav’n.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thee Father first they sung Omnipotent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immutable, Immortal, Infinite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternal King; thee Author of all being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fountain of Light, thy self invisible</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thron’d inaccessible, but when thou shad’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawn round about thee like a radiant Shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appeer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet dazle Heav’n, that brightest Seraphim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approach not, but with both wings veil thir eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee next they sang of all Creation first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whose conspicuous count’nance, without cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made visible, th’ Almighty Father shines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom else no Creature can behold; on thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impresst the effulgence of his Glorie abides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transfus’d on thee his ample Spirit rests.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hee Heav’n of Heavens and all the Powers therein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thee created, and by thee threw down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ aspiring Dominations: thou that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy Fathers dreadful Thunder didst not spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor stop thy flaming Chariot wheels, that shook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heav’ns everlasting Frame, while o’re the necks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou drov’st of warring Angels disarraid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee only extold, Son of thy Fathers might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To execute fierce vengeance on his foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not so on Man; him through their malice fall’n,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Father of Mercie and Grace, thou didst not doome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So strictly, but much more to pitie encline:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner did thy dear and onely Son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perceive thee purpos’d not to doom frail Man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So strictly, but much more to pitie enclin’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He to appease thy wrauth, and end the strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Mercy and Justice in thy face discern’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regardless of the Bliss wherein hee sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Second to thee, offerd himself to die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For mans offence.  O unexampl’d love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love no where to be found less then Divine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hail Son of God, Saviour of Men, thy Name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be the copious matter of my Song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Henceforth, and never shall my Harp thy praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forget, nor from thy Fathers praise disjoine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus they in Heav’n, above the starry Sphear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir happie hours in joy and hymning spent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mean while upon the firm opacous Globe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this round World, whose first convex divides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The luminous inferior Orbs, enclos’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From <i>Chaos</i> and th’ inroad of Darkness old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Satan</i> alighted walks: a Globe farr off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seem’d, now seems a boundless Continent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Starless expos’d, and ever-threatning storms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of <i>Chaos</i> blustring round, inclement skie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save on that side which from the wall of Heav’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though distant farr som small reflection gaines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of glimmering air less vext with tempest loud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here walk’d the Fiend at large in spacious field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when a Vultur on <i>Imaus</i> bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose snowie ridge the roving <i>Tartar</i> bounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dislodging from a Region scarce of prey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gorge the flesh of Lambs or yeanling Kids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Hills where Flocks are fed, flies toward the Springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of <i>Ganges</i> or <i>Hydaspes, Indian</i> streams;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in his way lights on the barren plaines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of <i>Sericana</i>, where <i>Chineses</i> drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Sails and Wind thir canie Waggons light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So on this windie Sea of Land, the Fiend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walk’d up and down alone bent on his prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone, for other Creature in this place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Living or liveless to be found was none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None yet, but store hereafter from the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up hither like Aereal vapours flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all things transitorie and vain, when Sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With vanity had filld the works of men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both all things vain, and all who in vain things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Built thir fond hopes of Glorie or lasting fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or happiness in this or th’ other life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All who have thir reward on Earth, the fruits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of painful Superstition and blind Zeal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naught seeking but the praise of men, here find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit retribution, emptie as thir deeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All th’ unaccomplisht works of Natures hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissolvd on earth, fleet hither, and in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till final dissolution, wander here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not in the neighbouring Moon, as some have dreamd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those argent Fields more likely habitants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt th’ Angelical and Human kinde:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hither of ill-joynd Sons and Daughters born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First from the ancient World those Giants came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a vain exploit, though then renownd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The builders next of <i>Babel</i> on the Plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of <i>Sennaar</i>, and still with vain designe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New <i>Babels</i>, had they wherewithall, would build:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others came single; hee who to be deemd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A God, leap’d fondly into <i>Aetna</i> flames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Empedocles</i>, and hee who to enjoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Plato’s Elysium</i>, leap’d into the Sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Cleombrotus</i>, and many more too long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embryo’s and Idiots, Eremits and Friers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White, Black and Grey, with all thir trumperie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here Pilgrims roam, that stray’d so farr to seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In <i>Golgotha</i> him dead, who lives in Heav’n;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they who to be sure of Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dying put on the weeds of <i>Dominic</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in <i>Franciscan</i> think to pass disguis’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They pass the Planets seven, and pass the fixt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that Crystalline Sphear whose ballance weighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trepidation talkt, and that first mov’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now Saint <i>Peter</i> at Heav’ns Wicket seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wait them with his Keys, and now at foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Heav’ns ascent they lift thir Feet, when loe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A violent cross wind from either Coast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blows them transverse ten thousand Leagues awry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the devious Air; then might ye see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cowles, Hoods and Habits with thir wearers tost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flutterd into Raggs, then Reliques, Beads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indulgences, Dispenses, Pardons, Bulls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sport of Winds: all these upwhirld aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly o’re the backside of the World farr off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a <i>Limbo</i> large and broad, since calld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long after, now unpeopl’d, and untrod;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All this dark Globe the Fiend found as he pass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long he wanderd, till at last a gleame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dawning light turnd thither-ward in haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His travell’d steps; farr distant hee descries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ascending by degrees magnificent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the wall of Heaven a Structure high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At top whereof, but farr more rich appeerd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The work as of a Kingly Palace Gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Frontispice of Diamond and Gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imbellisht, thick with sparkling orient Gemmes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Portal shon, inimitable on Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Model, or by shading Pencil drawn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Stairs were such as whereon <i>Jacob</i> saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angels ascending and descending, bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Guardians bright, when he from <i>Esau</i> fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To <i>Padan-Aram</i> in the field of <i>Luz</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreaming by night under the open Skie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And waking cri’d, This is the Gate of Heav’n.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each Stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There alwaies, but drawn up to Heav’n somtimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Viewless, and underneath a bright Sea flow’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jasper, or of liquid Pearle, whereon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who after came from Earth, sayling arriv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wafted by Angels, or flew o’re the Lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rapt in a Chariot drawn by fiery Steeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Stairs were then let down, whether to dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Fiend by easie ascent, or aggravate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sad exclusion from the dores of Bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Direct against which op’nd from beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just o’re the blissful seat of Paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A passage down to th’ Earth, a passage wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wider by farr then that of after-times</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over Mount <i>Sion</i>, and, though that were large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the <i>Promis’d Land</i> to God so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which, to visit oft those happy Tribes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On high behests his Angels to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass’d frequent, and his eye with choice regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From <i>Paneas</i> the fount of <i>Jordans</i> flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To <i>Beersaba</i>, where the <i>Holy Land</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Borders on <i>Aegypt</i> and the <i>Arabian</i> shoare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wide the op’ning seemd, where bounds were set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To darkness, such as bound the Ocean wave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Satan</i> from hence now on the lower stair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scal’d by steps of Gold to Heav’n Gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looks down with wonder at the sudden view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all this World at once.  As when a Scout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through dark and desart wayes with peril gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night; at last by break of chearful dawne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obtains the brow of some high-climbing Hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to his eye discovers unaware</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goodly prospect of some forein land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First-seen, or some renownd Metropolis</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With glistering Spires and Pinnacles adornd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which now the Rising Sun guilds with his beams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such wonder seis’d, though after Heaven seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Spirit maligne, but much more envy seis’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At sight of all this World beheld so faire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round he surveys, and well might, where he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So high above the circling Canopie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nights extended shade; from Eastern Point</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of <i>Libra</i> to the fleecie Starr that bears</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Andromeda</i> farr off <i>Atlantick</i> Seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond th’ <i>Horizon</i>; then from Pole to Pole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He views in bredth, and without longer pause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down right into the Worlds first Region throws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flight precipitant, and windes with ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the pure marble Air his oblique way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongst innumerable Starrs, that shon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stars distant, but nigh hand seemd other Worlds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or other Worlds they seemd, or happy Iles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like those <i>Hesperian</i> Gardens fam’d of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fortunate Fields, and Groves and flourie Vales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice happy Iles, but who dwelt happy there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stayd not to enquire: above them all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The golden Sun in splendor likest Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Allur’d his eye: Thither his course he bends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the calm Firmament; but up or downe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By center, or eccentric, hard to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Longitude, where the great Luminarie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alooff the vulgar Constellations thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from his Lordly eye keep distance due,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dispenses Light from farr; they as they move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir Starry dance in numbers that compute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Days, months, and years, towards his all-chearing Lamp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn swift their various motions, or are turnd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By his Magnetic beam, that gently warms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Univers, and to each inward part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gentle penetration, though unseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shoots invisible vertue even to the deep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wondrously was set his Station bright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Astronomer in the Sun’s lucent Orbe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through his glaz’d Optic Tube yet never saw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The place he found beyond expression bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compar’d with aught on Earth, Medal or Stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not all parts like, but all alike informd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With radiant light, as glowing Iron with fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If mettal, part seemd Gold, part Silver cleer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If stone, Carbuncle most or Chrysolite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rubie or Topaz, to the Twelve that shon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In <i>Aarons</i> Brest-plate, and a stone besides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagind rather oft then elsewhere seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stone, or like to that which here below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Philosophers in vain so long have sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain, though by thir powerful Art they binde</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Volatil <i>Hermes</i>, and call up unbound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In various shapes old <i>Proteus</i> from the Sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draind through a Limbec to his Native forme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wonder then if fields and regions here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathe forth <i>Elixir</i> pure, and Rivers run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Potable Gold, when with one vertuous touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ Arch-chimic Sun so farr from us remote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Produces with Terrestrial Humor mixt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here in the dark so many precious things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of colour glorious and effect so rare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here matter new to gaze the Devil met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Undazl’d, farr and wide his eye commands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all Sun-shine, as when his Beams at Noon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Culminate from th’ <i>Aequator</i>, as they now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shot upward still direct, whence no way round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shadow from body opaque can fall, and the Aire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No where so cleer, sharp’nd his visual ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To objects distant farr, whereby he soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw within kenn a glorious Angel stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same whom <i>John</i> saw also in the Sun:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His back was turnd, but not his brightness hid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beaming sunnie Raies, a golden tiar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circl’d his Head, nor less his Locks behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illustrious on his Shoulders fledge with wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay waving round; on som great charge imploy’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hee seemd, or fixt in cogitation deep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad was the Spirit impure as now in hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find who might direct his wandring flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Paradise the happie seat of Man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His journies end and our beginning woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first he casts to change his proper shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which else might work him danger or delay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now a stripling Cherube he appeers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not of the prime, yet such as in his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youth smil’d Celestial, and to every Limb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sutable grace diffus’d, so well he feignd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under a Coronet his flowing haire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In curles on either cheek plaid, wings he wore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of many a colourd plume sprinkl’d with Gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His habit fit for speed succinct, and held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before his decent steps a Silver wand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drew not nigh unheard, the Angel bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turnd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admonisht by his eare, and strait was known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ Arch-Angel <i>Uriel</i>, one of the seav’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in Gods presence, neerest to his Throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand ready at command, and are his Eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That run through all the Heav’ns, or down to th’ Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear his swift errands over moist and dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’re Sea and Land: him <i>Satan</i> thus accostes;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span><i>Uriel</i>, for thou of those seav’n Spirits that stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sight of God’s high Throne, gloriously bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first art wont his great authentic will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Interpreter through highest Heav’n to bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all his Sons thy Embassie attend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here art likeliest by supream decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like honour to obtain, and as his Eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To visit oft this new Creation round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unspeakable desire to see, and know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these his wondrous works, but chiefly Man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His chief delight and favour, him for whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these his works so wondrous he ordaind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath brought me from the Quires of Cherubim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone thus wandring.  Brightest Seraph tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which of all these shining Orbes hath Man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all these shining Orbes his choice to dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may find him, and with secret gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or open admiration him behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On whom the great Creator hath bestowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces powrd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That both in him and all things, as is meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Universal Maker we may praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who justly hath drivn out his Rebell Foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To deepest Hell, and to repair that loss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Created this new happie Race of Men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To serve him better: wise are all his wayes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So spake the false dissembler unperceivd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For neither Man nor Angel can discern</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hypocrisie, the only evil that walks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invisible, except to God alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By his permissive will, through Heav’n and Earth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At wisdoms Gate, and to simplicitie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where no ill seems: Which now for once beguil’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Uriel</i>, though Regent of the Sun, and held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sharpest sighted Spirit of all in Heav’n;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to the fraudulent Impostor foule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his uprightness answer thus returnd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faire Angel, thy desire which tends to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The works of God, thereby to glorifie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great Work-Maister, leads to no excess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That reaches blame, but rather merits praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more it seems excess, that led thee hither</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thy Empyreal Mansion thus alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contented with report heare onely in heav’n:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wonderful indeed are all his works,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had in remembrance alwayes with delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what created mind can comprehend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thir number, or the wisdom infinite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That brought them forth, but hid thir causes deep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw when at his Word the formless Mass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This worlds material mould, came to a heap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confusion heard his voice, and wilde uproar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood rul’d, stood vast infinitude confin’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till at his second bidding darkness fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light shon, and order from disorder sprung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift to thir several Quarters hasted then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cumbrous Elements, Earth, Flood, Aire, Fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this Ethereal quintessence of Heav’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flew upward, spirited with various forms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rowld orbicular, and turnd to Starrs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each had his place appointed, each his course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest in circuit walles this Universe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look downward on that Globe whose hither side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With light from hence, though but reflected, shines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That place is Earth the seat of Man, that light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His day, which else as th’ other Hemisphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night would invade, but there the neighbouring Moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(So call that opposite fair Starr) her aide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Timely interposes, and her monthly round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heav’n;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With borrowd light her countenance triform</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence fills and empties to enlighten th’ Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her pale dominion checks the night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That spot to which I point is <i>Paradise</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Adams</i> abode, those loftie shades his Bowre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy way thou canst not miss, me mine requires.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus said, he turnd, and <i>Satan</i> bowing low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to superior Spirits is wont in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where honour due and reverence none neglects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took leave, and toward the coast of Earth beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down from th’ Ecliptic, sped with hop’d success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throws his steep flight with many an Aerie wheele,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor staid, till on <i>Niphates</i> top he lights.</span>
				</p>
				<h5>       THE END OF THE THIRD BOOK.</h5>
				<h4>  PARADISE LOST</h4>
				<p>
					<a id="link2HCH0004" name="link2HCH0004">
						<!--  H2 anchor -->
					</a>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
