<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
					<p>
						<span>O For that warning voice, which he who saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ <i>Apocalyps</i>, heard cry in Heaven aloud,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Came furious down to be reveng’d on men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Wo to the Inhabitants on Earth!</i> that now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While time was, our first Parents had bin warnd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The coming of thir secret foe, and scap’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Haply so scap’d his mortal snare; for now</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Satan</i>, now first inflam’d with rage, came down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Tempter ere th’ Accuser of man-kind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To wreck on innocent frail man his loss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of that first Battel, and his flight to Hell:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet not rejoycing in his speed, though bold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Begins his dire attempt, which nigh the birth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now rowling, boiles in his tumultuous brest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And like a devillish Engine back recoiles</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon himself; horror and doubt distract</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His troubl’d thoughts, and from the bottom stirr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Hell within him, for within him Hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One step no more then from himself can fly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That slumberd, wakes the bitter memorie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of what he was, what is, and what must be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sometimes towards <i>Eden</i> which now in his view</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lay pleasant, his grievd look he fixes sad,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sometimes towards Heav’n and the full-blazing Sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which now sat high in his Meridian Towre:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then much revolving, thus in sighs began.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O thou that with surpassing Glory crownd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look’st from thy sole Dominion like the God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of this new World; at whose sight all the Starrs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hide thir diminisht heads; to thee I call,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But with no friendly voice, and add thy name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That bring to my remembrance from what state</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I fell, how glorious once above thy Spheare;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Warring in Heav’n against Heav’ns matchless King:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ah wherefore! he deservd no such return</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From me, whom he created what I was</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In that bright eminence, and with his good</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upbraided none; nor was his service hard.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What could be less then to afford him praise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How due! yet all his good prov’d ill in me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wrought but malice; lifted up so high</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I sdeind subjection, and thought one step higher</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would set me highest, and in a moment quit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The debt immense of endless gratitude,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So burthensome, still paying, still to ow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forgetful what from him I still receivd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And understood not that a grateful mind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By owing owes not, but still pays, at once</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Indebted and dischargd; what burden then?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O had his powerful Destiny ordaind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Me some inferiour Angel, I had stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then happie; no unbounded hope had rais’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ambition. Yet why not? som other Power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As great might have aspir’d, and me though mean</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fell not, but stand unshak’n, from within</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or from without, to all temptations arm’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hadst thou the same free Will and Power to stand?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to accuse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Heav’ns free Love dealt equally to all?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be then his Love accurst, since love or hate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To me alike, it deals eternal woe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay curs’d be thou; since against his thy will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chose freely what it now so justly rues.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Me miserable! which way shall I flie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Infinite wrauth, and infinite despaire?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which way I flie is Hell; my self am Hell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in the lowest deep a lower deep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still threatning to devour me opens wide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heav’n.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O then at last relent: is there no place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None left but by submission; and that word</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Disdain</i> forbids me, and my dread of shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduc’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With other promises and other vaunts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then to submit, boasting I could subdue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Omnipotent. Ay me, they little know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How dearly I abide that boast so vaine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under what torments inwardly I groane;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While they adore me on the Throne of Hell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Diadem and Scepter high advanc’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The lower still I fall, onely Supream</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In miserie; such joy Ambition findes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But say I could repent and could obtaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Act of Grace my former state; how soon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would highth recal high thoughts, how soon unsay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What feign’d submission swore: ease would recant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vows made in pain, as violent and void.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For never can true reconcilement grow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where wounds of deadly hate have peirc’d so deep:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which would but lead me to a worse relapse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And heavier fall: so should I purchase deare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Short intermission bought with double smart.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This knows my punisher; therefore as farr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From granting hee, as I from begging peace:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All hope excluded thus, behold in stead</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of us out-cast, exil’d, his new delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mankind created, and for him this World.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So farwel Hope, and with Hope farwel Fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farwel Remorse: all Good to me is lost;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divided Empire with Heav’ns King I hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By thee, and more then half perhaps will reigne;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Man ere long, and this new World shall know.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus while he spake, each passion dimm’d his face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thrice chang’d with pale, ire, envie and despair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which marrd his borrow’d visage, and betraid</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him counterfet, if any eye beheld.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For heav’nly mindes from such distempers foule</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are ever cleer. Whereof hee soon aware,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each perturbation smooth’d with outward calme,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Artificer of fraud; and was the first</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That practisd falshood under saintly shew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deep malice to conceale, couch’t with revenge:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet not anough had practisd to deceive</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Uriel</i> once warnd; whose eye pursu’d him down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The way he went, and on th’ <i>Assyrian</i> mount</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saw him disfigur’d, more then could befall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spirit of happie sort: his gestures fierce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He markd and mad demeanour, then alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As he suppos’d, all unobserv’d, unseen.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So on he fares, and to the border comes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Eden</i>, where delicious Paradise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now nearer, Crowns with her enclosure green,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As with a rural mound the champain head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of a steep wilderness, whose hairie sides</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With thicket overgrown, grottesque and wilde,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Access deni’d; and over head up grew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Insuperable highth of loftiest shade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cedar, and Pine, and Firr, and branching Palm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Silvan Scene, and as the ranks ascend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shade above shade, a woodie Theatre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of stateliest view. Yet higher then thir tops</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The verdurous wall of Paradise up sprung:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which to our general Sire gave prospect large</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into his neather Empire neighbouring round.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And higher then that Wall a circling row</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of goodliest Trees loaden with fairest Fruit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Appeerd, with gay enameld colours mixt:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On which the Sun more glad impress’d his beams</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then in fair Evening Cloud, or humid Bow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When God hath showrd the earth; so lovely seemd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Lantskip: And of pure now purer aire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vernal delight and joy, able to drive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All sadness but despair: now gentle gales</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fanning thir odoriferous wings dispense</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those balmie spoiles. As when to them who saile</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond the <i>Cape of Hope</i>, and now are past</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Mozambic</i>, off at Sea North-East windes blow</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Sabean</i> Odours from the spicie shoare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Arabie</i> the blest, with such delay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well pleas’d they slack thir course, and many a League</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cheard with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So entertaind those odorous sweets the Fiend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who came thir bane, though with them better pleas’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then <i>Asmodeus</i> with the fishie fume,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That drove him, though enamourd, from the Spouse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Tobits</i> Son, and with a vengeance sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From <i>Media</i> post to <i>Aegypt</i>, there fast bound.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Now to th’ ascent of that steep savage Hill</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Satan</i> had journied on, pensive and slow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But further way found none, so thick entwin’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As one continu’d brake, the undergrowth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplext</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All path of Man or Beast that past that way:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One Gate there onely was, and that look’d East</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On th’ other side: which when th’ arch-fellon saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Due entrance he disdaind, and in contempt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At one slight bound high overleap’d all bound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Hill or highest Wall, and sheer within</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lights on his feet. As when a prowling Wolfe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Watching where Shepherds pen thir Flocks at eeve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In hurdl’d Cotes amid the field secure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leaps o’re the fence with ease into the Fould:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or as a Thief bent to unhoord the cash</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of some rich Burgher, whose substantial dores,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cross-barrd and bolted fast, fear no assault,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In at the window climbes, or o’re the tiles;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So clomb this first grand Thief into Gods Fould:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So since into his Church lewd Hirelings climbe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The middle Tree and highest there that grew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sat like a Cormorant; yet not true Life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thereby regaind, but sat devising Death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To them who liv’d; nor on the vertue thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of that life-giving Plant, but only us’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For prospect, what well us’d had bin the pledge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of immortalitie. So little knows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Any, but God alone, to value right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The good before him, but perverts best things</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To worst abuse, or to thir meanest use.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath him with new wonder now he views</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all delight of human sense expos’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In narrow room Natures whole wealth, yea more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Heaven on Earth, for blissful Paradise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of God the Garden was, by him in the East</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Eden</i> planted; <i>Eden</i> stretchd her Line</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From <i>Auran</i> Eastward to the Royal Towrs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of great <i>Seleucia</i>, built by <i>Grecian</i> Kings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or where the Sons of <i>Eden</i> long before</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dwelt in <i>Telassar:</i> in this pleasant soile</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His farr more pleasant Garden God ordaind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of the fertil ground he caus’d to grow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all amid them stood the Tree of Life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>High eminent, blooming Ambrosial Fruit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of vegetable Gold; and next to Life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our Death the Tree of Knowledge grew fast by,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knowledge of Good bought dear by knowing ill.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Southward through <i>Eden</i> went a River large,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor chang’d his course, but through the shaggie hill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pass’d underneath ingulft, for God had thrown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Mountain as his Garden mould high rais’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the rapid current, which through veins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of porous Earth with kindly thirst up drawn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rose a fresh Fountain, and with many a rill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Waterd the Garden; thence united fell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down the steep glade, and met the neather Flood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which from his darksom passage now appeers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now divided into four main Streams,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Runs divers, wandring many a famous Realme</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Country whereof here needs no account,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But rather to tell how, if Art could tell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How from that Saphire Fount the crisped Brooks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rowling on Orient Pearl and sands of Gold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With mazie error under pendant shades</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ran Nectar, visiting each plant, and fed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flours worthy of Paradise which not nice Art</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Beds and curious Knots, but Nature boon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Powrd forth profuse on Hill and Dale and Plaine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both where the morning Sun first warmly smote</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The open field, and where the unpierc’t shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imbround the noontide Bowrs: Thus was this place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A happy rural seat of various view;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Groves whose rich Trees wept odorous Gumms and Balme,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Others whose fruit burnisht with Golden Rinde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hung amiable, <i>Hesperian</i> Fables true,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If true, here onely, and of delicious taste:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Betwixt them Lawns, or level Downs, and Flocks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grasing the tender herb, were interpos’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or palmie hilloc, or the flourie lap</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of som irriguous Valley spread her store,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flours of all hue, and without Thorn the Rose:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another side, umbrageous Grots and Caves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of coole recess, o’re which the mantling Vine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Layes forth her purple Grape, and gently creeps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down the slope hills, disperst, or in a Lake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That to the fringed Bank with Myrtle crownd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her chrystall mirror holds, unite thir streams.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Birds thir quire apply; aires, vernal aires,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The trembling leaves, while Universal <i>Pan</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knit with the <i>Graces</i> and the <i>Hours</i> in dance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Led on th’ Eternal Spring. Not that faire field</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Enna</i>, where <i>Proserpin</i> gathring flours</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her self a fairer Floure by gloomie <i>Dis</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was gatherd, which cost <i>Ceres</i> all that pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To seek her through the world; nor that sweet Grove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Daphne</i> by <i>Orontes</i>, and th’ inspir’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Castalian</i> Spring might with this Paradise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Eden</i> strive; nor that <i>Nyseian</i> Ile</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Girt with the River <i>Triton</i>, where old <i>Cham</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom Gentiles <i>Ammon</i> call and <i>Libyan Jove</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hid <i>Amalthea</i> and her Florid Son</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Young <i>Bacchus</i> from his Stepdame <i>Rhea’s</i> eye;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor where <i>Abassin</i> Kings thir issue Guard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mount <i>Amara</i>, though this by som suppos’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>True Paradise under the <i>Ethiop</i> Line</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By <i>Nilus</i> head, enclos’d with shining Rock,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A whole dayes journey high, but wide remote</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From this <i>Assyrian</i> Garden, where the Fiend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saw undelighted all delight, all kind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of living Creatures new to sight and strange:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two of far nobler shape erect and tall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Godlike erect, with native Honour clad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In naked Majestie seemd Lords of all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And worthie seemd, for in thir looks Divine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The image of thir glorious Maker shon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Truth, Wisdome, Sanctitude severe and pure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Severe, but in true filial freedom plac’t;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whence true autoritie in men; though both</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not equal, as thir sex not equal seemd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For contemplation hee and valour formd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For softness shee and sweet attractive Grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hee for God only, shee for God in him:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His fair large Front and Eye sublime declar’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Absolute rule; and Hyacinthin Locks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Round from his parted forelock manly hung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Clustring, but not beneath his shoulders broad:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shee as a vail down to the slender waste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her unadorned golden tresses wore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dissheveld, but in wanton ringlets wav’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As the Vine curles her tendrils, which impli’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Subjection, but requir’d with gentle sway,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by her yeilded, by him best receivd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yeilded with coy submission, modest pride,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sweet reluctant amorous delay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor those mysterious parts were then conceald,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then was not guiltie shame, dishonest shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of natures works, honor dishonorable,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sin-bred, how have ye troubl’d all mankind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With shews instead, meer shews of seeming pure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And banisht from mans life his happiest life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Simplicitie and spotless innocence.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So passd they naked on, nor shund the sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of God or Angel, for they thought no ill:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So hand in hand they passd, the lovliest pair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ever since in loves imbraces met,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Adam</i> the goodliest man of men since borne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Sons, the fairest of her Daughters <i>Eve</i>.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under a tuft of shade that on a green</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stood whispering soft, by a fresh Fountain side</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They sat them down, and after no more toil</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of thir sweet Gardning labour then suffic’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To recommend coole <i>Zephyr</i>, and made ease</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More easie, wholsom thirst and appetite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More grateful, to thir Supper Fruits they fell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nectarine Fruits which the compliant boughes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yeilded them, side-long as they sat recline</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the soft downie Bank damaskt with flours:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The savourie pulp they chew, and in the rinde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still as they thirsted scoop the brimming stream;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wanted, nor youthful dalliance as beseems</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fair couple, linkt in happie nuptial League,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alone as they. About them frisking playd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Beasts of th’ Earth, since wilde, and of all chase</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Wood or Wilderness, Forrest or Den;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sporting the Lion rampd, and in his paw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dandl’d the Kid; Bears, Tygers, Ounces, Pards</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gambold before them, th’ unwieldy Elephant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make them mirth us’d all his might, &amp; wreathd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Lithe Proboscis; close the Serpent sly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His breaded train, and of his fatal guile</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Coucht, and now fild with pasture gazing sat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or Bedward ruminating: for the Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Declin’d was hasting now with prone carreer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To th’ Ocean Iles, and in th’ ascending Scale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Heav’n the Starrs that usher Evening rose:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When <i>Satan</i> still in gaze, as first he stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scarce thus at length faild speech recoverd sad.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O Hell! what doe mine eyes with grief behold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into our room of bliss thus high advanc’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not Spirits, yet to heav’nly Spirits bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Little inferior; whom my thoughts pursue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With wonder, and could love, so lively shines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In them Divine resemblance, and such grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The hand that formd them on thir shape hath pourd.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ah gentle pair, yee little think how nigh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your change approaches, when all these delights</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will vanish and deliver ye to woe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More woe, the more your taste is now of joy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Happie, but for so happie ill secur’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long to continue, and this high seat your Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ill fenc’t for Heav’n to keep out such a foe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As now is enterd; yet no purpos’d foe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To you whom I could pittie thus forlorne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though I unpittied: League with you I seek,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mutual amitie so streight, so close,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I with you must dwell, or you with me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Henceforth; my dwelling haply may not please</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like this fair Paradise, your sense, yet such</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accept your Makers work; he gave it me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which I as freely give; Hell shall unfould,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To entertain you two, her widest Gates,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And send forth all her Kings; there will be room,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not like these narrow limits, to receive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your numerous ofspring; if no better place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thank him who puts me loath to this revenge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On you who wrong me not for him who wrongd.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And should I at your harmless innocence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Melt, as I doe, yet public reason just,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honour and Empire with revenge enlarg’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By conquering this new World, compels me now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To do what else though damnd I should abhorre.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake the Fiend, and with necessitie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Tyrants plea, excus’d his devilish deeds.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then from his loftie stand on that high Tree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down he alights among the sportful Herd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of those fourfooted kindes, himself now one,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now other, as thir shape servd best his end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neerer to view his prey, and unespi’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mark what of thir state he more might learn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By word or action markt: about them round</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Lion now he stalkes with fierie glare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then as a Tiger, who by chance hath spi’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In some Purlieu two gentle Fawnes at play,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strait couches close, then rising changes oft</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whence rushing he might surest seise them both</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grip’t in each paw: when <i>Adam</i> first of men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To first of women <i>Eve</i> thus moving speech,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Turnd him all eare to heare new utterance flow.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Sole partner and sole part of all these joyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dearer thy self then all; needs must the Power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That made us, and for us this ample World</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be infinitly good, and of his good</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As liberal and free as infinite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That rais’d us from the dust and plac’t us here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all this happiness, who at his hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have nothing merited, nor can performe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aught whereof hee hath need, hee who requires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From us no other service then to keep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This one, this easie charge, of all the Trees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Paradise that beare delicious fruit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So various, not to taste that onely Tree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So neer grows Death to Life, what ere Death is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Som dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou knowst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God hath pronounc’t it death to taste that Tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The only sign of our obedience left</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among so many signes of power and rule</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conferrd upon us, and Dominion giv’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over all other Creatures that possesse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Earth, Aire, and Sea. Then let us not think hard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One easie prohibition, who enjoy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Free leave so large to all things else, and choice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unlimited of manifold delights:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But let us ever praise him, and extoll</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His bountie, following our delightful task</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To prune these growing Plants, &amp; tend these Flours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which were it toilsom, yet with thee were sweet.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus Eve repli’d. O thou for whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from whom I was formd flesh of thy flesh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And without whom am to no end, my Guide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Head, what thou hast said is just and right.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For wee to him indeed all praises owe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And daily thanks, I chiefly who enjoy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So farr the happier Lot, enjoying thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Preeminent by so much odds, while thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like consort to thy self canst no where find.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That day I oft remember, when from sleep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I first awak’t, and found my self repos’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under a shade on flours, much wondring where</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of waters issu’d from a Cave and spread</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into a liquid Plain, then stood unmov’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pure as th’ expanse of Heav’n; I thither went</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With unexperienc’t thought, and laid me downe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the green bank, to look into the cleer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smooth Lake, that to me seemd another Skie.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I bent down to look, just opposite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Shape within the watry gleam appeerd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bending to look on me, I started back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It started back, but pleasd I soon returnd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pleas’d it returnd as soon with answering looks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sympathie and love, there I had fixt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mine eyes till now, and pin’d with vain desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had not a voice thus warnd me, What thou seest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What there thou seest fair Creature is thy self,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With thee it came and goes: but follow me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I will bring thee where no shadow staies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy coming, and thy soft imbraces, hee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose image thou art, him thou shall enjoy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inseparablie thine, to him shalt beare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Multitudes like thy self, and thence be call’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mother of human Race: what could I doe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But follow strait, invisibly thus led?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till I espi’d thee, fair indeed and tall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under a Platan, yet methought less faire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Less winning soft, less amiablie milde,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then that smooth watry image; back I turnd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou following cryd’st aloud, Return fair <i>Eve</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom fli’st thou? whom thou fli’st, of him thou art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of my side to thee, neerest my heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Substantial Life, to have thee by my side</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Henceforth an individual solace dear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Part of my Soul I seek thee, and thee claim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My other half: with that thy gentle hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seisd mine, I yeilded, and from that time see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How beauty is excelld by manly grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake our general Mother, and with eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of conjugal attraction unreprov’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And meek surrender, half imbracing leand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On our first Father, half her swelling Breast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Naked met his under the flowing Gold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both of her Beauty and submissive Charms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smil’d with superior Love, as <i>Jupiter</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>On <i>Juno</i> smiles, when he impregns the Clouds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That shed <i>May</i> Flowers; and press’d her Matron lip</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With kisses pure: aside the Devil turnd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For envie, yet with jealous leer maligne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ey’d them askance, and to himself thus plaind.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imparadis’t in one anothers arms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The happier <i>Eden</i>, shall enjoy thir fill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of bliss on bliss, while I to Hell am thrust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among our other torments not the least,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still unfulfill’d with pain of longing pines;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet let me not forget what I have gain’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From thir own mouths; all is not theirs it seems:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One fatal Tree there stands of Knowledge call’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidd’n?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Suspicious, reasonless. Why should thir Lord</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Envie them that? can it be sin to know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can it be death? and do they onely stand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Ignorance, is that thir happie state,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The proof of thir obedience and thir faith?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O fair foundation laid whereon to build</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir ruine! Hence I will excite thir minds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With more desire to know, and to reject</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Envious commands, invented with designe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To keep them low whom knowledge might exalt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Equal with Gods; aspiring to be such,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They taste and die: what likelier can ensue?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But first with narrow search I must walk round</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Garden, and no corner leave unspi’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A chance but chance may lead where I may meet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some wandring Spirit of Heav’n, by Fountain side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or in thick shade retir’d, from him to draw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What further would be learnt. Live while ye may,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet happie pair; enjoy, till I return,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So saying, his proud step he scornful turn’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But with sly circumspection, and began</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through wood, through waste, o’re hil, o’re dale his roam.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mean while in utmost Longitude, where Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Slowly descended, and with right aspect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against the eastern Gate of Paradise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leveld his eevning Rayes: it was a Rock</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Alablaster, pil’d up to the Clouds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conspicuous farr, winding with one ascent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accessible from Earth, one entrance high;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The rest was craggie cliff, that overhung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still as it rose, impossible to climbe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Betwixt these rockie Pillars <i>Gabriel</i> sat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chief of th’ Angelic Guards, awaiting night;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About him exercis’d Heroic Games</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ unarmed Youth of Heav’n, but nigh at hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Celestial Armourie, Shields, Helmes, and Speares</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hung high with Diamond flaming, and with Gold.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thither came <i>Uriel</i>, gliding through the Eeven</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On a Sun beam, swift as a shooting Starr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In <i>Autumn</i> thwarts the night, when vapors fir’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impress the Air, and shews the Mariner</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From what point of his Compass to beware</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impetuous winds: he thus began in haste.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Gabriel</i>, to thee thy cours by Lot hath giv’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Charge and strict watch that to this happie place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No evil thing approach or enter in;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This day at highth of Noon came to my Spheare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Spirit, zealous, as he seem’d, to know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More of th’ Almighties works, and chiefly Man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gods latest Image: I describ’d his way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bent all on speed, and markt his Aerie Gate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in the Mount that lies from <i>Eden</i> North,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where he first lighted, soon discernd his looks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alien from Heav’n, with passions foul obscur’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mine eye pursu’d him still, but under shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lost sight of him; one of the banisht crew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I fear, hath ventur’d from the deep, to raise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>New troubles; him thy care must be to find.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom the winged Warriour thus returnd:</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Uriel</i>, no wonder if thy perfet sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amid the Suns bright circle where thou sitst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See farr and wide: in at this Gate none pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The vigilance here plac’t, but such as come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well known from Heav’n; and since Meridian hour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No Creature thence: if Spirit of other sort,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So minded, have oreleapt these earthie bounds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On purpose, hard thou knowst it to exclude</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spiritual substance with corporeal barr.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if within the circuit of these walks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou telst, by morrow dawning I shall know.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So promis’d hee, and <i>Uriel</i> to his charge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Returnd on that bright beam, whose point now raisd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bore him slope downward to the Sun now fall’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath th’ <i>Azores</i>; whither the prime Orb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Incredible how swift, had thither rowl’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Diurnal, or this less volubil Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By shorter flight to th’ East, had left him there</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arraying with reflected Purple and Gold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Clouds that on his Western Throne attend:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now came still Eevning on, and Twilight gray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had in her sober Liverie all things clad;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Silence accompanied, for Beast and Bird,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They to thir grassie Couch, these to thir Nests</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were slunk, all but the wakeful Nightingale;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She all night long her amorous descant sung;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Silence was pleas’d: now glow’d the Firmament</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With living Saphirs: <i>Hesperus</i> that led</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The starrie Host, rode brightest, till the Moon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rising in clouded Majestie, at length</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Apparent Queen unvaild her peerless light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And o’re the dark her Silver Mantle threw.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>When <i>Adam</i> thus to <i>Eve</i>: Fair Consort, th’ hour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of night, and all things now retir’d to rest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mind us of like repose, since God hath set</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Labour and rest, as day and night to men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Successive, and the timely dew of sleep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now falling with soft slumbrous weight inclines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our eye-lids; other Creatures all day long</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rove idle unimploid, and less need rest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man hath his daily work of body or mind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Appointed, which declares his Dignitie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the regard of Heav’n on all his waies;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While other Animals unactive range,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of thir doings God takes no account.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tomorrow ere fresh Morning streak the East</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With first approach of light, we must be ris’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And at our pleasant labour, to reform</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yon flourie Arbors, yonder Allies green,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our walks at noon, with branches overgrown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That mock our scant manuring, and require</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More hands then ours to lop thir wanton growth:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those Blossoms also, and those dropping Gumms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That lie bestrowne unsightly and unsmooth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mean while, as Nature wills, Night bids us rest.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Eve</i> with perfet beauty adornd.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unargu’d I obey; so God ordains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God is thy Law, thou mine: to know no more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is womans happiest knowledge and her praise.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With thee conversing I forget all time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All seasons and thir change, all please alike.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With charm of earliest Birds; pleasant the Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When first on this delightful Land he spreads</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His orient Beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glistring with dew; fragrant the fertil earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After soft showers; and sweet the coming on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of grateful Eevning milde, then silent Night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With this her solemn Bird and this fair Moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And these the Gemms of Heav’n, her starrie train:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But neither breath of Morn when she ascends</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With charm of earliest Birds, nor rising Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On this delightful land, nor herb, fruit, floure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glistring with dew, nor fragrance after showers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor grateful Evening mild, nor silent Night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With this her solemn Bird, nor walk by Moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or glittering Starr-light without thee is sweet.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But wherfore all night long shine these, for whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom our general Ancestor repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Daughter of God and Man, accomplisht <i>Eve</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those have thir course to finish, round the Earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By morrow Eevning, and from Land to Land</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In order, though to Nations yet unborn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ministring light prepar’d, they set and rise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Least total darkness should by Night regaine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her old possession, and extinguish life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Nature and all things, which these soft fires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not only enlighten, but with kindly heate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of various influence foment and warme,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Temper or nourish, or in part shed down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir stellar vertue on all kinds that grow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On Earth, made hereby apter to receive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perfection from the Suns more potent Ray.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shine not in vain, nor think, though men were none,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That heav’n would want spectators, God want praise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Millions of spiritual Creatures walk the Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All these with ceasless praise his works behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both day and night: how often from the steep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of echoing Hill or Thicket have we heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Celestial voices to the midnight air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sole, or responsive each to others note</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Singing thir great Creator: oft in bands</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Heav’nly touch of instrumental sounds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In full harmonic number joind, thir songs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus talking hand in hand alone they pass’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On to thir blissful Bower; it was a place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chos’n by the sovran Planter, when he fram’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All things to mans delightful use; the roofe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of thickest covert was inwoven shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Laurel and Mirtle, and what higher grew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Acanthus</i>, and each odorous bushie shrub</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fenc’d up the verdant wall; each beauteous flour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Iris</i> all hues, Roses, and Gessamin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rear’d high thir flourisht heads between, and wrought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mosaic; underfoot the Violet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crocus, and Hyacinth with rich inlay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Broiderd the ground, more colour’d then with stone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of costliest Emblem: other Creature here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beast, Bird, Insect, or Worm durst enter none;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such was thir awe of man. In shadier Bower</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More sacred and sequesterd, though but feignd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Pan</i> or <i>Silvanus</i> never slept, nor Nymph,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor <i>Faunus</i> haunted. Here in close recess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Flowers, Garlands, and sweet-smelling Herbs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Espoused <i>Eve</i> deckt first her Nuptial Bed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And heav’nly Quires the Hymenaean sung,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What day the genial Angel to our Sire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brought her in naked beauty more adorn’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More lovely then <i>Pandora</i>, whom the Gods</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Endowd with all thir gifts, and O too like</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In sad event, when to the unwiser Son</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Japhet</i> brought by <i>Hermes</i>, she ensnar’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mankind with her faire looks, to be aveng’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On him who had stole <i>Joves</i> authentic fire.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus at thir shadie Lodge arriv’d, both stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both turnd, and under op’n Skie ador’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The God that made both Skie, Air, Earth &amp; Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which they beheld, the Moons resplendent Globe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And starrie Pole: Thou also mad’st the Night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Maker Omnipotent, and thou the Day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which we in our appointed work imployd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have finisht happie in our mutual help</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mutual love, the Crown of all our bliss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ordain’d by thee, and this delicious place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For us too large, where thy abundance wants</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But thou hast promis’d from us two a Race</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fill the Earth, who shall with us extoll</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said unanimous, and other Rites</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Observing none, but adoration pure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which God likes best, into thir inmost bower</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Handed they went; and eas’d the putting off</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These troublesom disguises which wee wear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strait side by side were laid, nor turnd I weene</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Adam</i> from his fair Spouse, nor <i>Eve</i> the Rites</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mysterious of connubial Love refus’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whatever Hypocrites austerely talk</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of puritie and place and innocence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Defaming as impure what God declares</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pure, and commands to som, leaves free to all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But our Destroyer, foe to God and Man?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Haile wedded Love, mysterious Law, true source</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of human ofspring, sole proprietie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Paradise of all things common else.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By thee adulterous lust was driv’n from men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the bestial herds to raunge, by thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Founded in Reason, Loyal, Just, and Pure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Relations dear, and all the Charities</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Father, Son, and Brother first were known.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farr be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perpetual Fountain of Domestic sweets,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose Bed is undefil’d and chast pronounc’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Present, or past, as Saints and Patriarchs us’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here Love his golden shafts imploies, here lights</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unindeard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Casual fruition, nor in Court Amours</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mixt Dance, or wanton Mask, or Midnight Bal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or Serenate, which the starv’d Lover sings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These lulld by Nightingales imbraceing slept,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on thir naked limbs the flourie roof</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Showrd Roses, which the Morn repair’d. Sleep on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blest pair; and O yet happiest if ye seek</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No happier state, and know to know no more.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Now had night measur’d with her shaddowie Cone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Half way up Hill this vast Sublunar Vault,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from thir Ivorie Port the Cherubim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forth issuing at th’ accustomd hour stood armd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thir night watches in warlike Parade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When <i>Gabriel</i> to his next in power thus spake.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Uzziel</i>, half these draw off, and coast the South</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With strictest watch; these other wheel the North,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our circuit meets full West. As flame they part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Half wheeling to the Shield, half to the Spear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From these, two strong and suttle Spirits he calld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That neer him stood, and gave them thus in charge.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Ithuriel</i> and <i>Zephon</i>, with wingd speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Search through this Garden, leav unsearcht no nook,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But chiefly where those two fair Creatures Lodge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now laid perhaps asleep secure of harme.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Eevning from the Sun’s decline arriv’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who tells of som infernal Spirit seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escap’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The barrs of Hell, on errand bad no doubt:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So saying, on he led his radiant Files,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Daz’ling the Moon; these to the Bower direct</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In search of whom they sought: him there they found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Squat like a Toad, close at the eare of <i>Eve</i>;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assaying by his Devilish art to reach</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Organs of her Fancie, and with them forge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Illusions as he list, Phantasms and Dreams,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ animal Spirits that from pure blood arise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like gentle breaths from Rivers pure, thence raise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At least distemperd, discontented thoughts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vain hopes, vain aimes, inordinate desires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blown up with high conceits ingendring pride.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him thus intent <i>Ithuriel</i> with his Spear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Touch’d lightly; for no falshood can endure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Touch of Celestial temper, but returns</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of force to its own likeness: up he starts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discoverd and surpriz’d. As when a spark</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lights on a heap of nitrous Powder, laid</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fit for the Tun som Magazin to store</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against a rumord Warr, the Smuttie graine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With sudden blaze diffus’d, inflames the Aire:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So started up in his own shape the Fiend.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Back stept those two fair Angels half amaz’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So sudden to behold the grieslie King;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet thus, unmovd with fear, accost him soon.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Which of those rebell Spirits adjudg’d to Hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Com’st thou, escap’d thy prison, and transform’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why satst thou like an enemie in waite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here watching at the head of these that sleep?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Know ye not then said <i>Satan</i>, filld with scorn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For you, there sitting where ye durst not soare;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to know mee argues your selves unknown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The lowest of your throng; or if ye know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why ask ye, and superfluous begin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your message, like to end as much in vain?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Zephon</i>, answering scorn with scorn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or undiminisht brightness, to be known</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As when thou stoodst in Heav’n upright and pure;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Glorie then, when thou no more wast good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Departed from thee, and thou resembl’st now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foule.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This place inviolable, and these from harm.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake the Cherube, and his grave rebuke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Severe in youthful beautie, added grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Invincible: abasht the Devil stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And felt how awful goodness is, and saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vertue in her shape how lovly, saw, and pin’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His loss; but chiefly to find here observd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His lustre visibly impar’d; yet seemd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Undaunted. If I must contend, said he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Best with the best, the Sender not the sent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or all at once; more glorie will be wonn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or less be lost. Thy fear, said <i>Zephon</i> bold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will save us trial what the least can doe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Fiend repli’d not, overcome with rage;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But like a proud Steed reind, went hautie on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chaumping his iron curb: to strive or flie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He held it vain; awe from above had quelld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His heart, not else dismai’d. Now drew they nigh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The western point, where those half-rounding guards</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Just met, &amp; closing stood in squadron joind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Awaiting next command. To whom thir Chief</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Gabriel</i> from the Front thus calld aloud.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hasting this way, and now by glimps discerne</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Ithuriel</i> and <i>Zephon</i> through the shade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with them comes a third of Regal port,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But faded splendor wan; who by his gate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not likely to part hence without contest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He scarce had ended, when those two approachd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And brief related whom they brought, wher found,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How busied, in what form and posture coucht.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom with stern regard thus <i>Gabriel</i> spake.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why hast thou, <i>Satan</i>, broke the bounds prescrib’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thy transgressions, and disturbd the charge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of others, who approve not to transgress</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By thy example, but have power and right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To question thy bold entrance on this place;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imploi’d it seems to violate sleep, and those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Satan</i> with contemptuous brow.</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Gabriel</i>, thou hadst in Heav’n th’ esteem of wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And such I held thee; but this question askt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Puts me in doubt. Lives ther who loves his pain?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though thither doomd? Thou wouldst thy self, no doubt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And boldly venture to whatever place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Torment with ease, &amp; soonest recompence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dole with delight, which in this place I sought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thee no reason; who knowst only good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But evil hast not tri’d: and wilt object</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His will who bound us? let him surer barr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In that dark durance: thus much what was askt.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The rest is true, they found me where they say;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that implies not violence or harme.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus hee in scorn. The warlike Angel mov’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disdainfully half smiling thus repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O loss of one in Heav’n to judge of wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since <i>Satan</i> fell, whom follie overthrew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now returns him from his prison scap’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unlicenc’t from his bounds in Hell prescrib’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So wise he judges it to fly from pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>However, and to scape his punishment.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrauth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which thou incurr’st by flying, meet thy flight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seavenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can equal anger infinite provok’t.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Less pain, less to be fled, or thou then they</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Less hardie to endure? courageous Chief,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The first in flight from pain, had’st thou alleg’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thy deserted host this cause of flight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To which the Fiend thus answerd frowning stern.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Insulting Angel, well thou knowst I stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy fiercest, when in Battel to thy aide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The blasting volied Thunder made all speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But still thy words at random, as before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Argue thy inexperience what behooves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From hard assaies and ill successes past</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A faithful Leader, not to hazard all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through wayes of danger by himself untri’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I therefore, I alone first undertook</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To wing the desolate Abyss, and spie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This new created World, whereof in Hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fame is not silent, here in hope to find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Better abode, and my afflicted Powers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To settle here on Earth, or in mid Aire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though for possession put to try once more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What thou and thy gay Legions dare against;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose easier business were to serve thir Lord</span>
						<br/>
						<span>High up in Heav’n, with songs to hymne his Throne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And practis’d distances to cringe, not fight.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom the warriour Angel soon repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To say and strait unsay, pretending first</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wise to flie pain, professing next the Spie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Argues no Leader, but a lyar trac’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Satan</i>, and couldst thou faithful add? O name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O sacred name of faithfulness profan’d!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Armie of Fiends, fit body to fit head;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was this your discipline and faith ingag’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your military obedience, to dissolve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Allegeance to th’ acknowledg’d Power supream?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Patron of liberty, who more then thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Once fawn’d, and cring’d, and servilly ador’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heav’ns awful Monarch? wherefore but in hope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To dispossess him, and thy self to reigne?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But mark what I arreede thee now, avant;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flie thither whence thou fledst: if from this houre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within these hallowd limits thou appeer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Back to th’ infernal pit I drag thee chaind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Seale thee so, as henceforth not to scorne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The facil gates of hell too slightly barrd.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So threatn’d hee, but <i>Satan</i> to no threats</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gave heed, but waxing more in rage repli’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Then when I am thy captive talk of chaines,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Proud limitarie Cherube, but ere then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farr heavier load thy self expect to feel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From my prevailing arme, though Heavens King</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Us’d to the yoak, draw’st his triumphant wheels</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In progress through the rode of Heav’n Star-pav’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>While thus he spake, th’ Angelic Squadron bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Turnd fierie red, sharpning in mooned hornes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir Phalanx, and began to hemm him round</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With ported Spears, as thick as when a field</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Ceres</i> ripe for harvest waving bends</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her bearded Grove of ears, which way the wind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Swayes them; the careful Plowman doubting stands</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Least on the threshing floore his hopeful sheaves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prove chaff. On th’ other side <i>Satan</i> allarm’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Collecting all his might dilated stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like <i>Teneriff</i> or <i>Atlas</i> unremov’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His stature reacht the Skie, and on his Crest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sat horror Plum’d; nor wanted in his graspe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What seemd both Spear and Shield: now dreadful deeds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Might have ensu’d, nor onely Paradise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this commotion, but the Starrie Cope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Heav’n perhaps, or all the Elements</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At least had gon to rack, disturbd and torne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With violence of this conflict, had not soon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Eternal to prevent such horrid fray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hung forth in Heav’n his golden Scales, yet seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Betwixt <i>Astrea</i> and the <i>Scorpion</i> signe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherein all things created first he weighd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The pendulous round Earth with ballanc’t Aire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In counterpoise, now ponders all events,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Battels and Realms: in these he put two weights</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sequel each of parting and of fight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The latter quick up flew, and kickt the beam;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which <i>Gabriel</i> spying, thus bespake the Fiend.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Satan</i>, I know thy strength, and thou knowst mine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neither our own but giv’n; what follie then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To boast what Arms can doe, since thine no more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then Heav’n permits, nor mine, though doubld now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To trample thee as mire: for proof look up,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And read thy Lot in yon celestial Sign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where thou art weigh’d, &amp; shown how light, how weak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If thou resist. The Fiend lookt up and knew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His mounted scale aloft: nor more; but fled</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
