<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
<p class="pfirst">
No more of talk where God or Angel Guest<br/>
With Man, as with his Friend, familiar us’d<br/>
To sit indulgent, and with him partake<br/>
Rural repast, permitting him the while<br/>
Venial discourse unblam’d: I now must change<br/>
Those Notes to Tragic; foul distrust, and breach<br/>
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt<br/>
And disobedience: On the part of Heav’n<br/>
Now alienated, distance and distaste,<br/>
Anger and just rebuke, and judgement giv’n,<br/>
That brought into this World a world of woe,<br/>
Sinne and her shadow Death, and Miserie<br/>
Deaths Harbinger: Sad task, yet argument<br/>
Not less but more Heroic then the wrauth<br/>
Of stern <i>Achilles</i> on his Foe pursu’d<br/>
Thrice Fugitive about <i>Troy</i> Wall; or rage<br/>
Of <i>Turnus</i> for <i>Lavinia</i> disespous’d,<br/>
Or <i>Neptun’s</i> ire or <i>Juno’s</i>, that so long<br/>
Perplex’d the <i>Greek</i> and <i>Cytherea’s</i> Son;<br/>
If answerable style I can obtaine<br/>
Of my Celestial Patroness, who deignes<br/>
Her nightly visitation unimplor’d,<br/>
And dictates to me slumbring, or inspires<br/>
Easie my unpremeditated Verse:<br/>
Since first this subject for Heroic Song<br/>
Pleas’d me long choosing, and beginning late;<br/>
Not sedulous by Nature to indite<br/>
Warrs, hitherto the onely Argument<br/>
Heroic deem’d, chief maistrie to dissect<br/>
With long and tedious havoc fabl’d Knights<br/>
In Battels feign’d; the better fortitude<br/>
Of Patience and Heroic Martyrdom<br/>
Unsung; or to describe Races and Games,<br/>
Or tilting Furniture, emblazon’d Shields,<br/>
Impreses quaint, Caparisons and Steeds;<br/>
Bases and tinsel Trappings, gorgious Knights<br/>
At Joust and Torneament; then marshal’d Feast<br/>
Serv’d up in Hall with Sewers, and Seneshals;<br/>
The skill of Artifice or Office mean,<br/>
Not that which justly gives Heroic name<br/>
To Person or to Poem.  Mee of these<br/>
Nor skilld nor studious, higher Argument<br/>
Remaines, sufficient of it self to raise<br/>
That name, unless an age too late, or cold<br/>
Climat, or Years damp my intended wing<br/>
Deprest, and much they may, if all be mine,<br/>
Not Hers who brings it nightly to my Ear.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
The Sun was sunk, and after him the Starr<br/>
Of <i>Hesperus</i>, whose Office is to bring<br/>
Twilight upon the Earth, short Arbiter<br/>
Twixt Day and Night, and now from end to end<br/>
Nights Hemisphere had veild the Horizon round:<br/>
When <i>Satan</i> who late fled before the threats<br/>
Of <i>Gabriel</i> out of <i>Eden</i>, now improv’d<br/>
In meditated fraud and malice, bent<br/>
On mans destruction, maugre what might hap<br/>
Of heavier on himself, fearless return’d.<br/>
By Night he fled, and at Midnight return’d<br/>
From compassing the Earth, cautious of day,<br/>
Since <i>Uriel</i> Regent of the Sun descri’d<br/>
His entrance, and forewarnd the Cherubim<br/>
That kept thir watch; thence full of anguish driv’n,<br/>
The space of seven continu’d Nights he rode<br/>
With darkness, thrice the Equinoctial Line<br/>
He circl’d, four times cross’d the Carr of Night<br/>
From Pole to Pole, traversing each Colure;<br/>
On the eighth return’d, and on the Coast averse<br/>
From entrance or Cherubic Watch, by stealth<br/>
Found unsuspected way.  There was a place,<br/>
Now not, though Sin, not Time, first wraught the change,<br/>
Where <i>Tigris</i> at the foot of Paradise<br/>
Into a Gulf shot under ground, till part<br/>
Rose up a Fountain by the Tree of Life;<br/>
In with the River sunk, and with it rose<br/>
Satan involv’d in rising Mist, then sought<br/>
Where to lie hid; Sea he had searcht and Land<br/>
From <i>Eden</i> over <i>Pontus</i>, and the Poole<br/>
<i>Maeotis</i>, up beyond the River <i>Ob</i>;<br/>
Downward as farr Antartic; and in length<br/>
West from <i>Orantes</i> to the Ocean barr’d<br/>
At <i>Darien</i>, thence to the Land where flowes<br/>
<i>Ganges</i> and <i>Indus:</i> thus the Orb he roam’d<br/>
With narrow search; and with inspection deep<br/>
Consider’d every Creature, which of all<br/>
Most opportune might serve his Wiles, and found<br/>
The Serpent suttlest Beast of all the Field.<br/>
Him after long debate, irresolute<br/>
Of thoughts revolv’d, his final sentence chose<br/>
Fit Vessel, fittest Imp of fraud, in whom<br/>
To enter, and his dark suggestions hide<br/>
From sharpest sight: for in the wilie Snake,<br/>
Whatever sleights none would suspicious mark,<br/>
As from his wit and native suttletie<br/>
Proceeding, which in other Beasts observ’d<br/>
Doubt might beget of Diabolic pow’r<br/>
Active within beyond the sense of brute.<br/>
Thus he resolv’d, but first from inward griefe<br/>
His bursting passion into plaints thus pour’d:<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
O Earth, how like to Heav’n, if not preferrd<br/>
More justly, Seat worthier of Gods, as built<br/>
With second thoughts, reforming what was old!<br/>
For what God after better worse would build?<br/>
Terrestrial Heav’n, danc’t round by other Heav’ns<br/>
That shine, yet bear thir bright officious Lamps,<br/>
Light above Light, for thee alone, as seems,<br/>
In thee concentring all thir precious beams<br/>
Of sacred influence: As God in Heav’n<br/>
Is Center, yet extends to all, so thou<br/>
Centring receav’st from all those Orbs; in thee,<br/>
Not in themselves, all thir known vertue appeers<br/>
Productive in Herb, Plant, and nobler birth<br/>
Of Creatures animate with gradual life<br/>
Of Growth, Sense, Reason, all summ’d up in Man.<br/>
With what delight could I have walkt thee round<br/>
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange<br/>
Of Hill and Vallie, Rivers, Woods and Plaines,<br/>
Now Land, now Sea, &amp; Shores with Forrest crownd,<br/>
Rocks, Dens, and Caves; but I in none of these<br/>
Find place or refuge; and the more I see<br/>
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel<br/>
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege<br/>
Of contraries; all good to me becomes<br/>
Bane, and in Heav’n much worse would be my state.<br/>
But neither here seek I, no nor in Heav’n<br/>
To dwell, unless by maistring Heav’ns Supreame;<br/>
Nor hope to be my self less miserable<br/>
By what I seek, but others to make such<br/>
As I though thereby worse to me redound:<br/>
For onely in destroying I finde ease<br/>
To my relentless thoughts; and him destroyd,<br/>
Or won to what may work his utter loss,<br/>
For whom all this was made, all this will soon<br/>
Follow, as to him linkt in weal or woe,<br/>
In wo then; that destruction wide may range:<br/>
To mee shall be the glorie sole among<br/>
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marr’d<br/>
What he <i>Almightie</i> styl’d, six Nights and Days<br/>
Continu’d making, and who knows how long<br/>
Before had bin contriving, though perhaps<br/>
Not longer then since I in one Night freed<br/>
From servitude inglorious welnigh half<br/>
Th’ Angelic Name, and thinner left the throng<br/>
Of his adorers: hee to be aveng’d,<br/>
And to repaire his numbers thus impair’d,<br/>
Whether such vertue spent of old now faild<br/>
More Angels to Create, if they at least<br/>
Are his Created or to spite us more,<br/>
Determin’d to advance into our room<br/>
A Creature form’d of Earth, and him endow,<br/>
Exalted from so base original,<br/>
With Heav’nly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed<br/>
He effected; Man he made, and for him built<br/>
Magnificent this World, and Earth his seat,<br/>
Him Lord pronounc’d, and, O indignitie!<br/>
Subjected to his service Angel wings,<br/>
And flaming Ministers to watch and tend<br/>
Thir earthlie Charge: Of these the vigilance<br/>
I dread, and to elude, thus wrapt in mist<br/>
Of midnight vapor glide obscure, and prie<br/>
In every Bush and Brake, where hap may finde<br/>
The Serpent sleeping, in whose mazie foulds<br/>
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring.<br/>
O foul descent! that I who erst contended<br/>
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constraind<br/>
Into a Beast, and mixt with bestial slime,<br/>
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,<br/>
That to the hight of Deitie aspir’d;<br/>
But what will not Ambition and Revenge<br/>
Descend to? who aspires must down as low<br/>
As high he soard, obnoxious first or last<br/>
To basest things.  Revenge, at first though sweet,<br/>
Bitter ere long back on it self recoiles;<br/>
Let it; I reck not, so it light well aim’d,<br/>
Since higher I fall short, on him who next<br/>
Provokes my envie, this new Favorite<br/>
Of Heav’n, this Man of Clay, Son of despite,<br/>
Whom us the more to spite his Maker rais’d<br/>
From dust: spite then with spite is best repaid.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So saying, through each Thicket Danck or Drie,<br/>
Like a black mist low creeping, he held on<br/>
His midnight search, where soonest he might finde<br/>
The Serpent: him fast sleeping soon he found<br/>
In Labyrinth of many a round self-rowl’d,<br/>
His head the midst, well stor’d with suttle wiles:<br/>
Not yet in horrid Shade or dismal Den,<br/>
Not nocent yet, but on the grassie Herbe<br/>
Fearless unfeard he slept: in at his Mouth<br/>
The Devil enterd, and his brutal sense,<br/>
In heart or head, possessing soon inspir’d<br/>
With act intelligential; but his sleep<br/>
Disturbd not, waiting close th’ approach of Morn.<br/>
Now whenas sacred Light began to dawne<br/>
In <i>Eden</i> on the humid Flours, that breathd<br/>
Thir morning Incense, when all things that breath,<br/>
From th’ Earths great Altar send up silent praise<br/>
To the Creator, and his Nostrils fill<br/>
With gratefull Smell, forth came the human pair<br/>
And joynd thir vocal Worship to the Quire<br/>
Of Creatures wanting voice, that done, partake<br/>
The season, prime for sweetest Sents and Aires:<br/>
Then commune how that day they best may ply<br/>
Thir growing work: for much thir work outgrew<br/>
The hands dispatch of two Gardning so wide.<br/>
And <i>Eve</i> first to her Husband thus began.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
<i>Adam</i>, well may we labour still to dress<br/>
This Garden, still to tend Plant, Herb and Flour.<br/>
Our pleasant task enjoyn’d, but till more hands<br/>
Aid us, the work under our labour grows,<br/>
Luxurious by restraint; what we by day<br/>
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind,<br/>
One night or two with wanton growth derides<br/>
Tending to wilde.  Thou therefore now advise<br/>
Or hear what to my mind first thoughts present,<br/>
Let us divide our labours, thou where choice<br/>
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind<br/>
The Woodbine round this Arbour, or direct<br/>
The clasping Ivie where to climb, while I<br/>
In yonder Spring of Roses intermixt<br/>
With Myrtle, find what to redress till Noon:<br/>
For while so near each other thus all day<br/>
Our task we choose, what wonder if no near<br/>
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new<br/>
Casual discourse draw on, which intermits<br/>
Our dayes work brought to little, though begun<br/>
Early, and th’ hour of Supper comes unearn’d.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
To whom mild answer <i>Adam</i> thus return’d.<br/>
Sole <i>Eve</i>, Associate sole, to me beyond<br/>
Compare above all living Creatures deare,<br/>
Well hast thou motion’d, wel thy thoughts imployd<br/>
How we might best fulfill the work which here<br/>
God hath assign’d us, nor of me shalt pass<br/>
Unprais’d: for nothing lovelier can be found<br/>
In woman, then to studie houshold good,<br/>
And good workes in her Husband to promote.<br/>
Yet not so strictly hath our Lord impos’d<br/>
Labour, as to debarr us when we need<br/>
Refreshment, whether food, or talk between,<br/>
Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse<br/>
Of looks and smiles, for smiles from Reason flow,<br/>
To brute deni’d, and are of Love the food,<br/>
Love not the lowest end of human life.<br/>
For not to irksom toile, but to delight<br/>
He made us, and delight to Reason joyn’d.<br/>
These paths and Bowers doubt not but our joynt<br/>
Will keep from Wilderness with ease, as wide<br/>
As we need walk, till younger hands ere long<br/>
Assist us: But if much converse perhaps<br/>
Thee satiate, to short absence I could yeild.<br/>
For solitude somtimes is best societie,<br/>
And short retirement urges sweet returne.<br/>
But other doubt possesses me, least harm<br/>
Befall thee sever’d from me; for thou knowst<br/>
What hath bin warn’d us, what malicious Foe<br/>
Envying our happiness, and of his own<br/>
Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame<br/>
By sly assault; and somwhere nigh at hand<br/>
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find<br/>
His wish and best advantage, us asunder,<br/>
Hopeless to circumvent us joynd, where each<br/>
To other speedie aide might lend at need;<br/>
Whether his first design be to withdraw<br/>
Our fealtie from God, or to disturb<br/>
Conjugal Love, then which perhaps no bliss<br/>
Enjoy’d by us excites his envie more;<br/>
Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side<br/>
That gave thee being, stil shades thee and protects.<br/>
The Wife, where danger or dishonour lurks,<br/>
Safest and seemliest by her Husband staies,<br/>
Who guards her, or with her the worst endures.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
To whom the Virgin Majestie of <i>Eve</i>,<br/>
As one who loves, and some unkindness meets,<br/>
With sweet austeer composure thus reply’d.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Ofspring of Heav’n and Earth, and all Earths Lord,<br/>
That such an enemie we have, who seeks<br/>
Our ruin, both by thee informd I learne,<br/>
And from the parting Angel over-heard<br/>
As in a shadie nook I stood behind,<br/>
Just then returnd at shut of Evening Flours.<br/>
But that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt<br/>
To God or thee, because we have a foe<br/>
May tempt it, I expected not to hear.<br/>
His violence thou fearst not, being such,<br/>
As wee, not capable of death or paine,<br/>
Can either not receave, or can repell.<br/>
His fraud is then thy fear, which plain inferrs<br/>
Thy equal fear that my firm Faith and Love<br/>
Can by his fraud be shak’n or seduc’t;<br/>
Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy Brest,<br/>
<i>Adam</i>, misthought of her to thee so dear?<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
To whom with healing words <i>Adam</i> reply’d.<br/>
Daughter of God and Man, immortal <i>Eve</i>,<br/>
For such thou art, from sin and blame entire:<br/>
Not diffident of thee do I dissuade<br/>
Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid<br/>
Th’ attempt it self, intended by our Foe.<br/>
For hee who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses<br/>
The tempted with dishonour foul, suppos’d<br/>
Not incorruptible of Faith, not prooff<br/>
Against temptation: thou thy self with scorne<br/>
And anger wouldst resent the offer’d wrong,<br/>
Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then,<br/>
If such affront I labour to avert<br/>
From thee alone, which on us both at once<br/>
The Enemie, though bold, will hardly dare,<br/>
Or daring, first on mee th’ assault shall light.<br/>
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn;<br/>
Suttle he needs must be, who could seduce<br/>
Angels, nor think superfluous others aid.<br/>
I from the influence of thy looks receave<br/>
Access in every Vertue, in thy sight<br/>
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were<br/>
Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on,<br/>
Shame to be overcome or over-reacht<br/>
Would utmost vigor raise, and rais’d unite.<br/>
Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel<br/>
When I am present, and thy trial choose<br/>
With me, best witness of thy Vertue tri’d.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So spake domestick <i>Adam</i> in his care<br/>
And Matrimonial Love, but <i>Eve</i>, who thought<br/>
Less attributed to her Faith sincere,<br/>
Thus her reply with accent sweet renewd.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
If this be our condition, thus to dwell<br/>
In narrow circuit strait’nd by a Foe,<br/>
Suttle or violent, we not endu’d<br/>
Single with like defence, wherever met,<br/>
How are we happie, still in fear of harm?<br/>
But harm precedes not sin: onely our Foe<br/>
Tempting affronts us with his foul esteem<br/>
Of our integritie: his foul esteeme<br/>
Sticks no dishonor on our Front, but turns<br/>
Foul on himself; then wherfore shund or feard<br/>
By us? who rather double honour gaine<br/>
From his surmise prov’d false, finde peace within,<br/>
Favour from Heav’n, our witness from th’ event.<br/>
And what is Faith, Love, Vertue unassaid<br/>
Alone, without exterior help sustaind?<br/>
Let us not then suspect our happie State<br/>
Left so imperfet by the Maker wise,<br/>
As not secure to single or combin’d.<br/>
Fraile is our happiness, if this be so,<br/>
And <i>Eden</i> were no <i>Eden</i> thus expos’d.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
To whom thus <i>Adam</i> fervently repli’d.<br/>
O Woman, best are all things as the will<br/>
Of God ordaind them, his creating hand<br/>
Nothing imperfet or deficient left<br/>
Of all that he Created, much less Man,<br/>
Or ought that might his happie State secure,<br/>
Secure from outward force; within himself<br/>
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:<br/>
Against his will he can receave no harme.<br/>
But God left free the Will, for what obeyes<br/>
Reason, is free, and Reason he made right,<br/>
But bid her well beware, and still erect,<br/>
Least by some faire appeering good surpris’d<br/>
She dictate false, and missinforme the Will<br/>
To do what God expresly hath forbid.<br/>
Not then mistrust, but tender love enjoynes,<br/>
That I should mind thee oft, and mind thou me.<br/>
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve,<br/>
Since Reason not impossibly may meet<br/>
Some specious object by the Foe subornd,<br/>
And fall into deception unaware,<br/>
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warnd.<br/>
Seek not temptation then, which to avoide<br/>
Were better, and most likelie if from mee<br/>
Thou sever not; Trial will come unsought.<br/>
Wouldst thou approve thy constancie, approve<br/>
First thy obedience; th’ other who can know,<br/>
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?<br/>
But if thou think, trial unsought may finde<br/>
Us both securer then thus warnd thou seemst,<br/>
Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more;<br/>
Go in thy native innocence, relie<br/>
On what thou hast of vertue, summon all,<br/>
For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So spake the Patriarch of Mankinde, but <i>Eve</i><br/>
Persisted, yet submiss, though last, repli’d.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
With thy permission then, and thus forewarnd<br/>
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words<br/>
Touchd onely, that our trial, when least sought,<br/>
May finde us both perhaps farr less prepar’d,<br/>
The willinger I goe, nor much expect<br/>
A Foe so proud will first the weaker seek;<br/>
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse.<br/>
Thus saying, from her Husbands hand her hand<br/>
Soft she withdrew, and like a Wood-Nymph light<br/>
<i>Oread</i> or <i>Dryad</i>, or of <i>Delia’s</i> Traine,<br/>
Betook her to the Groves, but <i>Delia’s</i> self<br/>
In gate surpass’d and Goddess-like deport,<br/>
Though not as shee with Bow and Quiver armd,<br/>
But with such Gardning Tools as Are yet rude,<br/>
Guiltless of fire had formd, or Angels brought,<br/>
To <i>Pales</i>, or <i>Pomona</i>, thus adornd,<br/>
Likest she seemd, <i>Pomona</i> when she fled<br/>
<i>Vertumnus</i>, or to <i>Ceres</i> in her Prime,<br/>
Yet Virgin of <i>Proserpina</i> from <i>Jove</i>.<br/>
Her long with ardent look his <i>Eye</i> pursu’d<br/>
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.<br/>
Oft he to her his charge of quick returne,<br/>
Repeated, shee to him as oft engag’d<br/>
To be returnd by Noon amid the Bowre,<br/>
And all things in best order to invite<br/>
Noontide repast, or Afternoons repose.<br/>
O much deceav’d, much failing, hapless <i>Eve</i>,<br/>
Of thy presum’d return! event perverse!<br/>
Thou never from that houre in Paradise<br/>
Foundst either sweet repast, or found repose;<br/>
Such ambush hid among sweet Flours and Shades<br/>
Waited with hellish rancor imminent<br/>
To intercept thy way, or send thee back<br/>
Despoild of Innocence, of Faith, of Bliss.<br/>
For now, and since first break of dawne the Fiend,<br/>
Meer Serpent in appearance, forth was come,<br/>
And on his Quest, where likeliest he might finde<br/>
The onely two of Mankinde, but in them<br/>
The whole included Race, his purposd prey.<br/>
In Bowre and Field he sought, where any tuft<br/>
Of Grove or Garden-Plot more pleasant lay,<br/>
Thir tendance or Plantation for delight,<br/>
By Fountain or by shadie Rivulet<br/>
He sought them both, but wish’d his hap might find<br/>
<i>Eve</i> separate, he wish’d, but not with hope<br/>
Of what so seldom chanc’d, when to his wish,<br/>
Beyond his hope, <i>Eve</i> separate he spies,<br/>
Veild in a Cloud of Fragrance, where she stood,<br/>
Half spi’d, so thick the Roses bushing round<br/>
About her glowd, oft stooping to support<br/>
Each Flour of slender stalk, whose head though gay<br/>
Carnation, Purple, Azure, or spect with Gold,<br/>
Hung drooping unsustaind, them she upstaies<br/>
Gently with Mirtle band, mindless the while,<br/>
Her self, though fairest unsupported Flour,<br/>
From her best prop so farr, and storn so nigh.<br/>
Neererhe drew, and many a walk travers’d<br/>
Of stateliest Covert, Cedar, Pine, or Palme,<br/>
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen<br/>
Among thick-wov’n Arborets and Flours<br/>
Imborderd on each Bank, the hand of <i>Eve</i>:<br/>
Spot more delicious then those Gardens feign’d<br/>
Or of reviv’d <i>Adonis</i>, or renownd<br/>
<i>Alcinous</i>, host of old <i>Laertes</i> Son,<br/>
Or that, not Mystic, where the Sapient King<br/>
Held dalliance with his faire <i>Egyptian</i> Spouse.<br/>
Much hee the Place admir’d, the Person more.<br/>
As one who long in populous City pent,<br/>
Where Houses thick and Sewers annoy the Aire,<br/>
Forth issuing on a Summers Morn, to breathe<br/>
Among the pleasant Villages and Farmes<br/>
Adjoynd, from each thing met conceaves delight,<br/>
The smell of Grain, or tedded Grass, or Kine,<br/>
Or Dairie, each rural sight, each rural sound;<br/>
If chance with Nymphlike step fair Virgin pass,<br/>
What pleasing seemd, for her now pleases more,<br/>
She most, and in her look summs all Delight.<br/>
Such Pleasure took the Serpent to behold<br/>
This Flourie Plat, the sweet recess of <i>Eve</i><br/>
Thus earlie, thus alone; her Heav’nly forme<br/>
Angelic, but more soft, and Feminine,<br/>
Her graceful Innocence, her every Aire<br/>
Of gesture or lest action overawd<br/>
His Malice, and with rapine sweet bereav’d<br/>
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought:<br/>
That space the Evil one abstracted stood<br/>
From his own evil, and for the time remaind<br/>
Stupidly good, of enmitie disarm’d,<br/>
Of guile, of hate, of envie, of revenge;<br/>
But the hot Hell that alwayes in him burnes,<br/>
Though in mid Heav’n, soon ended his delight,<br/>
And tortures him now more, the more he sees<br/>
Of pleasure not for him ordain’d: then soon<br/>
Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts<br/>
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Thoughts, whither have he led me, with what sweet<br/>
Compulsion thus transported to forget<br/>
What hither brought us, hate, not love, nor hope<br/>
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste<br/>
Of pleasure, but all pleasure to destroy,<br/>
Save what is in destroying, other joy<br/>
To me is lost.  Then let me not let pass<br/>
Occasion which now smiles, behold alone<br/>
The Woman, opportune to all attempts,<br/>
Her Husband, for I view far round, not nigh,<br/>
Whose higher intellectual more I shun,<br/>
And strength, of courage hautie, and of limb<br/>
Heroic built, though of terrestrial mould,<br/>
Foe not informidable, exempt from wound,<br/>
I not; so much hath Hell debas’d, and paine<br/>
Infeebl’d me, to what I was in Heav’n.<br/>
Shee fair, divinely fair, fit Love for Gods,<br/>
Not terrible, though terrour be in Love<br/>
And beautie, not approacht by stronger hate,<br/>
Hate stronger, under shew of Love well feign’d,<br/>
The way which to her ruin now I tend.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So spake the Enemie of Mankind, enclos’d<br/>
In Serpent, Inmate bad, and toward <i>Eve</i><br/>
Address’d his way, not with indented wave,<br/>
Prone on the ground, as since, but on his reare,<br/>
Circular base of rising foulds, that tour’d<br/>
Fould above fould a surging Maze, his Head<br/>
Crested aloft, and Carbuncle his Eyes;<br/>
With burnisht Neck of verdant Gold, erect<br/>
Amidst his circling Spires, that on the grass<br/>
Floted redundant: pleasing was his shape,<br/>
And lovely, never since of Serpent kind<br/>
Lovelier, not those that in <i>Illyria</i> chang’d<br/>
<i>Hermione</i> and <i>Cadmus</i>, or the God<br/>
In <i>Epidaurus</i>; nor to which transformd<br/>
<i>Ammonian Jove</i>, or <i>Capitoline</i> was seen,<br/>
Hee with <i>Olympias</i>, this with her who bore<br/>
<i>Scipio</i> the highth of <i>Rome</i>.  With tract oblique<br/>
At first, as one who sought access, but feard<br/>
To interrupt, side-long he works his way.<br/>
As when a Ship by skilful Stearsman wrought<br/>
Nigh Rivers mouth or Foreland, where the Wind<br/>
Veres oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her Saile;<br/>
So varied hee, and of his tortuous Traine<br/>
Curld many a wanton wreath in sight of <i>Eve</i>,<br/>
To lure her Eye; shee busied heard the sound<br/>
Of rusling Leaves, but minded not, as us’d<br/>
To such disport before her through the Field,<br/>
From every Beast, more duteous at her call,<br/>
Then at <i>Circean</i> call the Herd disguis’d.<br/>
Hee boulder now, uncall’d before her stood;<br/>
But as in gaze admiring: Oft he bowd<br/>
His turret Crest, and sleek enamel’d Neck,<br/>
Fawning, and lick’d the ground whereon she trod.<br/>
His gentle dumb expression turnd at length<br/>
The Eye of <i>Eve</i> to mark his play; he glad<br/>
Of her attention gaind, with Serpent Tongue<br/>
Organic, or impulse of vocal Air,<br/>
His fraudulent temptation thus began.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps<br/>
Thou canst, who art sole Wonder, much less arm<br/>
Thy looks, the Heav’n of mildness, with disdain,<br/>
Displeas’d that I approach thee thus, and gaze<br/>
Insatiate, I thus single; nor have feard<br/>
Thy awful brow, more awful thus retir’d.<br/>
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker faire,<br/>
Thee all living things gaze on, all things thine<br/>
By gift, and thy Celestial Beautie adore<br/>
With ravishment beheld, there best beheld<br/>
Where universally admir’d; but here<br/>
In this enclosure wild, these Beasts among,<br/>
Beholders rude, and shallow to discerne<br/>
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,<br/>
Who sees thee? (and what is one?) who shouldst be seen<br/>
A Goddess among Gods, ador’d and serv’d<br/>
By Angels numberless, thy daily Train.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So gloz’d the Tempter, and his Proem tun’d;<br/>
Into the Heart of <i>Eve</i> his words made way,<br/>
Though at the voice much marveling; at length<br/>
Not unamaz’d she thus in answer spake.<br/>
What may this mean?  Language of Man pronounc’t<br/>
By Tongue of Brute, and human sense exprest?<br/>
The first at lest of these I thought deni’d<br/>
To Beasts, whom God on their Creation-Day<br/>
Created mute to all articulat sound;<br/>
The latter I demurre, for in thir looks<br/>
Much reason, and in thir actions oft appeers.<br/>
Thee, Serpent, suttlest beast of all the field<br/>
I knew, but not with human voice endu’d;<br/>
Redouble then this miracle, and say,<br/>
How cam’st thou speakable of mute, and how<br/>
To me so friendly grown above the rest<br/>
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight?<br/>
Say, for such wonder claims attention due.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
To whom the guileful Tempter thus reply’d.<br/>
Empress of this fair World, resplendent <i>Eve</i>,<br/>
Easie to mee it is to tell thee all<br/>
What thou commandst, and right thou shouldst be obeyd:<br/>
I was at first as other Beasts that graze<br/>
The trodden Herb, of abject thoughts and low,<br/>
As was my food, nor aught but food discern’d<br/>
Or Sex, and apprehended nothing high:<br/>
Till on a day roaving the field, I chanc’d<br/>
A goodly Tree farr distant to behold<br/>
Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixt,<br/>
Ruddie and Gold: I nearer drew to gaze;<br/>
When from the boughes a savorie odour blow’n,<br/>
Grateful to appetite, more pleas’d my sense<br/>
Then smell of sweetest Fenel, or the Teats<br/>
Of Ewe or Goat dropping with Milk at Eevn,<br/>
Unsuckt of Lamb or Kid, that tend thir play.<br/>
To satisfie the sharp desire I had<br/>
Of tasting those fair Apples, I resolv’d<br/>
Not to deferr; hunger and thirst at once,<br/>
Powerful perswaders, quick’nd at the scent<br/>
Of that alluring fruit, urg’d me so keene.<br/>
About the Mossie Trunk I wound me soon,<br/>
For high from ground the branches would require<br/>
Thy utmost reach or <i>Adams</i>: Round the Tree<br/>
All other Beasts that saw, with like desire<br/>
Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.<br/>
Amid the Tree now got, where plentie hung<br/>
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill<br/>
I spar’d not, for such pleasure till that hour<br/>
At Feed or Fountain never had I found.<br/>
Sated at length, ere long I might perceave<br/>
Strange alteration in me, to degree<br/>
Of Reason in my inward Powers, and Speech<br/>
Wanted not long, though to this shape retaind.<br/>
Thenceforth to Speculations high or deep<br/>
I turnd my thoughts, and with capacious mind<br/>
Considerd all things visible in Heav’n,<br/>
Or Earth, or Middle, all things fair and good;<br/>
But all that fair and good in thy Divine<br/>
Semblance, and in thy Beauties heav’nly Ray<br/>
United I beheld; no Fair to thine<br/>
Equivalent or second, which compel’d<br/>
Mee thus, though importune perhaps, to come<br/>
And gaze, and worship thee of right declar’d<br/>
Sovran of Creatures, universal Dame.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So talk’d the spirited sly Snake; and <i>Eve</i><br/>
Yet more amaz’d unwarie thus reply’d.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt<br/>
The vertue of that Fruit, in thee first prov’d:<br/>
But say, where grows the Tree, from hence how far?<br/>
For many are the Trees of God that grow<br/>
In Paradise, and various, yet unknown<br/>
To us, in such abundance lies our choice,<br/>
As leaves a greater store of Fruit untoucht,<br/>
Still hanging incorruptible, till men<br/>
Grow up to thir provision, and more hands<br/>
Help to disburden Nature of her Bearth.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
To whom the wilie Adder, blithe and glad.<br/>
Empress, the way is readie, and not long,<br/>
Beyond a row of Myrtles, on a Flat,<br/>
Fast by a Fountain, one small Thicket past<br/>
Of blowing Myrrh and Balme; if thou accept<br/>
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Lead then, said <i>Eve</i>.  Hee leading swiftly rowld<br/>
In tangles, and make intricate seem strait,<br/>
To mischief swift.  Hope elevates, and joy<br/>
Bright’ns his Crest, as when a wandring Fire<br/>
Compact of unctuous vapor, which the Night<br/>
Condenses, and the cold invirons round,<br/>
Kindl’d through agitation to a Flame,<br/>
Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends,<br/>
Hovering and blazing with delusive Light,<br/>
Misleads th’ amaz’d Night-wanderer from his way<br/>
To Boggs and Mires, &amp; oft through Pond or Poole,<br/>
There swallow’d up and lost, from succour farr.<br/>
So glister’d the dire Snake and into fraud<br/>
Led <i>Eve</i> our credulous Mother, to the Tree<br/>
Of prohibition, root of all our woe;<br/>
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Serpent, we might have spar’d our coming hither,<br/>
Fruitless to me, though Fruit be here to excess,<br/>
The credit of whose vertue rest with thee,<br/>
Wondrous indeed, if cause of such effects.<br/>
But of this Tree we may not taste nor touch;<br/>
God so commanded, and left that Command<br/>
Sole Daughter of his voice; the rest, we live<br/>
Law to our selves, our Reason is our Law.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
To whom the Tempter guilefully repli’d.<br/>
Indeed? hath God then said that of the Fruit<br/>
Of all these Garden Trees ye shall not eate,<br/>
Yet Lords declar’d of all in Earth or Aire?<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
To whom thus <i>Eve</i> yet sinless.  Of the Fruit<br/>
Of each Tree in the Garden we may eate,<br/>
But of the Fruit of this fair Tree amidst<br/>
The Garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eate<br/>
Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, least ye die.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
She scarse had said, though brief, when now more bold<br/>
The Tempter, but with shew of Zeale and Love<br/>
To Man, and indignation at his wrong,<br/>
New part puts on, and as to passion mov’d,<br/>
Fluctuats disturbd, yet comely, and in act<br/>
Rais’d, as of som great matter to begin.<br/>
As when of old som Orator renound<br/>
In <i>Athens</i> or free <i>Rome</i>, where Eloquence<br/>
Flourishd, since mute, to som great cause addrest,<br/>
Stood in himself collected, while each part,<br/>
Motion, each act won audience ere the tongue,<br/>
Somtimes in highth began, as no delay<br/>
Of Preface brooking through his Zeal of Right.<br/>
So standing, moving, or to highth upgrown<br/>
The Tempter all impassiond thus began.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
O Sacred, Wise, and Wisdom-giving Plant,<br/>
Mother of Science, Now I feel thy Power<br/>
Within me cleere, not onely to discerne<br/>
Things in thir Causes, but to trace the wayes<br/>
Of highest Agents, deemd however wise.<br/>
Queen of this Universe, doe not believe<br/>
Those rigid threats of Death; ye shall not Die:<br/>
How should ye? by the Fruit? it gives you Life<br/>
To Knowledge?  By the Threatner, look on mee,<br/>
Mee who have touch’d and tasted, yet both live,<br/>
And life more perfet have attaind then Fate<br/>
Meant mee, by ventring higher then my Lot.<br/>
Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast<br/>
Is open? or will God incense his ire<br/>
For such a pretty Trespass, and not praise<br/>
Rather your dauntless vertue, whom the pain<br/>
Of Death denounc’t, whatever thing Death be,<br/>
Deterrd not from atchieving what might leade<br/>
To happier life, knowledge of Good and Evil;<br/>
Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil<br/>
Be real, why not known, since easier shunnd?<br/>
God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just;<br/>
Not just, not God; not feard then, nor obeid:<br/>
Your feare it self of Death removes the feare.<br/>
Why then was this forbid?  Why but to awe,<br/>
Why but to keep ye low and ignorant,<br/>
His worshippers; he knows that in the day<br/>
Ye Eate thereof, your Eyes that seem so cleere,<br/>
Yet are but dim, shall perfetly be then<br/>
Op’nd and cleerd, and ye shall be as Gods,<br/>
Knowing both Good and Evil as they know.<br/>
That ye should be as Gods, since I as Man,<br/>
Internal Man, is but proportion meet,<br/>
I of brute human, yee of human Gods.<br/>
So ye shalt die perhaps, by putting off<br/>
Human, to put on Gods, death to be wisht,<br/>
Though threat’nd, which no worse then this can bring<br/>
And what are Gods that Man may not become<br/>
As they, participating God-like food?<br/>
The Gods are first, and that advantage use<br/>
On our belief, that all from them proceeds,<br/>
I question it, for this fair Earth I see,<br/>
Warm’d by the Sun, producing every kind,<br/>
Them nothing: If they all things, who enclos’d<br/>
Knowledge of Good and Evil in this Tree,<br/>
That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains<br/>
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies<br/>
Th’ offence, that Man should thus attain to know?<br/>
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this Tree<br/>
Impart against his will if all be his?<br/>
Or is it envie, and can envie dwell<br/>
In heav’nly brests? these, these and many more<br/>
Causes import your need of this fair Fruit.<br/>
Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
He ended, and his words replete with guile<br/>
Into her heart too easie entrance won:<br/>
Fixt on the Fruit she gaz’d, which to behold<br/>
Might tempt alone, and in her ears the sound<br/>
Yet rung of his perswasive words, impregn’d<br/>
With Reason, to her seeming, and with Truth;<br/>
Meanwhile the hour of Noon drew on, and wak’d<br/>
An eager appetite, rais’d by the smell<br/>
So savorie of that Fruit, which with desire,<br/>
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste,<br/>
Sollicited her longing eye; yet first<br/>
Pausing a while, thus to her self she mus’d.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Great are thy Vertues, doubtless, best of Fruits,<br/>
Though kept from Man, &amp; worthy to be admir’d,<br/>
Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay<br/>
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught<br/>
The Tongue not made for Speech to speak thy praise:<br/>
Thy praise hee also who forbids thy use,<br/>
Conceales not from us, naming thee the Tree<br/>
Of Knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil;<br/>
Forbids us then to taste, but his forbidding<br/>
Commends thee more, while it inferrs the good<br/>
By thee communicated, and our want:<br/>
For good unknown, sure is not had, or had<br/>
And yet unknown, is as not had at all.<br/>
In plain then, what forbids he but to know,<br/>
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise?<br/>
Such prohibitions binde not.  But if Death<br/>
Bind us with after-bands, what profits then<br/>
Our inward freedom?  In the day we eate<br/>
Of this fair Fruit, our doom is, we shall die.<br/>
How dies the Serpent? hee hath eat’n and lives,<br/>
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discernes,<br/>
Irrational till then.  For us alone<br/>
Was death invented? or to us deni’d<br/>
This intellectual food, for beasts reserv’d?<br/>
For Beasts it seems: yet that one Beast which first<br/>
Hath tasted, envies not, but brings with joy<br/>
The good befall’n him, Author unsuspect,<br/>
Friendly to man, farr from deceit or guile.<br/>
What fear I then, rather what know to feare<br/>
Under this ignorance of Good and Evil,<br/>
Of God or Death, of Law or Penaltie?<br/>
Here grows the Cure of all, this Fruit Divine,<br/>
Fair to the Eye, inviting to the Taste,<br/>
Of vertue to make wise: what hinders then<br/>
To reach, and feed at once both Bodie and Mind?<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So saying, her rash hand in evil hour<br/>
Forth reaching to the Fruit, she pluck’d, she eat:<br/>
Earth felt the wound, and Nature from her seat<br/>
Sighing through all her Works gave signs of woe,<br/>
That all was lost.  Back to the Thicket slunk<br/>
The guiltie Serpent, and well might, for <i>Eve</i><br/>
Intent now wholly on her taste, naught else<br/>
Regarded, such delight till then, as seemd,<br/>
In Fruit she never tasted, whether true<br/>
Or fansied so, through expectation high<br/>
Of knowledg, nor was God-head from her thought.<br/>
Greedily she ingorg’d without restraint,<br/>
And knew not eating Death: Satiate at length,<br/>
And hight’nd as with Wine, jocond and boon,<br/>
Thus to her self she pleasingly began.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
O Sovran, vertuous, precious of all Trees<br/>
In Paradise, of operation blest<br/>
To Sapience, hitherto obscur’d, infam’d,<br/>
And thy fair Fruit let hang, as to no end<br/>
Created; but henceforth my early care,<br/>
Not without Song, each Morning, and due praise<br/>
Shall tend thee, and the fertil burden ease<br/>
Of thy full branches offer’d free to all;<br/>
Till dieted by thee I grow mature<br/>
In knowledge, as the Gods who all things know;<br/>
Though others envie what they cannot give;<br/>
For had the gift bin theirs, it had not here<br/>
Thus grown.  Experience, next to thee I owe,<br/>
Best guide; not following thee, I had remaind<br/>
In ignorance, thou op’nst Wisdoms way,<br/>
And giv’st access, though secret she retire.<br/>
And I perhaps am secret; Heav’n is high,<br/>
High and remote to see from thence distinct<br/>
Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps<br/>
May have diverted from continual watch<br/>
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his Spies<br/>
About him.  But to <i>Adam</i> in what sort<br/>
Shall I appeer? shall I to him make known<br/>
As yet my change, and give him to partake<br/>
Full happiness with mee, or rather not,<br/>
But keep the odds of Knowledge in my power<br/>
Without Copartner? so to add what wants<br/>
In Femal Sex, the more to draw his Love,<br/>
And render me more equal, and perhaps<br/>
A thing not undesireable, somtime<br/>
Superior; for inferior who is free?<br/>
This may be well: but what if God have seen,<br/>
And Death ensue? then I shall be no more,<br/>
And <i>Adam</i> wedded to another <i>Eve</i>,<br/>
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct;<br/>
A death to think.  Confirm’d then I resolve,<br/>
<i>Adam</i> shall share with me in bliss or woe:<br/>
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths<br/>
I could endure; without him live no life.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So saying, from the Tree her step she turnd,<br/>
But first low Reverence don, as to the power<br/>
That dwelt within, whose presence had infus’d<br/>
Into the plant sciential sap, deriv’d<br/>
From Nectar, drink of Gods.  <i>Adam</i> the while<br/>
Waiting desirous her return, had wove<br/>
Of choicest Flours a Garland to adorne<br/>
Her Tresses, and her rural labours crown<br/>
As Reapers oft are wont thir Harvest Queen.<br/>
Great joy he promis’d to his thoughts, and new<br/>
Solace in her return, so long delay’d;<br/>
Yet oft his heart, divine of somthing ill,<br/>
Misgave him; hee the faultring measure felt;<br/>
And forth to meet her went, the way she took<br/>
That Morn when first they parted; by the Tree<br/>
Of Knowledge he must pass, there he her met,<br/>
Scarse from the Tree returning; in her hand<br/>
A bough of fairest fruit that downie smil’d,<br/>
New gatherd, and ambrosial smell diffus’d.<br/>
To him she hasted, in her face excuse<br/>
Came Prologue, and Apologie to prompt,<br/>
Which with bland words at will she thus addrest.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Hast thou not wonderd, <i>Adam</i>, at my stay?<br/>
Thee I have misst, and thought it long, depriv’d<br/>
Thy presence, agonie of love till now<br/>
Not felt, nor shall be twice, for never more<br/>
Mean I to trie, what rash untri’d I sought,<br/>
The paine of absence from thy sight.  But strange<br/>
Hath bin the cause, and wonderful to heare:<br/>
This Tree is not as we are told, a Tree<br/>
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown<br/>
Op’ning the way, but of Divine effect<br/>
To open Eyes, and make them Gods who taste;<br/>
And hath bin tasted such; the Serpent wise,<br/>
Or not restraind as wee, or not obeying,<br/>
Hath eat’n of the fruit, and is become,<br/>
Not dead, as we are threatn’d, but thenceforth<br/>
Endu’d with human voice and human sense,<br/>
Reasoning to admiration, and with mee<br/>
Perswasively hath so prevaild, that I<br/>
Have also tasted, and have also found<br/>
Th’ effects to correspond, opener mine Eyes,<br/>
Dimm erst, dilated Spirits, ampler Heart,<br/>
And growing up to Godhead; which for thee<br/>
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise.<br/>
For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss,<br/>
Tedious, unshar’d with thee, and odious soon.<br/>
Thou therefore also taste, that equal Lot<br/>
May joyne us, equal Joy, as equal Love;<br/>
Least thou not tasting, different degree<br/>
Disjoyne us, and I then too late renounce<br/>
Deitie for thee, when Fate will not permit.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Thus <i>Eve</i> with Countnance blithe her storie told;<br/>
But in her Cheek distemper flushing glowd.<br/>
On th’ other side, <i>Adam</i>, soon as he heard<br/>
The fatal Trespass don by <i>Eve</i>, amaz’d,<br/>
Astonied stood and Blank, while horror chill<br/>
Ran through his veins, and all his joynts relax’d;<br/>
From his slack hand the Garland wreath’d for <i>Eve</i><br/>
Down drop’d, and all the faded Roses shed:<br/>
Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length<br/>
First to himself he inward silence broke.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
O fairest of Creation, last and best<br/>
Of all Gods Works, Creature in whom excell’d<br/>
Whatever can to fight or thought be found,<br/>
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!<br/>
How art thou lost, how on a sudden lost,<br/>
Defac’t, deflourd, and now to Death devote?<br/>
Rather how hast thou yeelded to transgress<br/>
The strict forbiddance, how to violate<br/>
The sacred Fruit forbidd’n! som cursed fraud<br/>
Of Enemie hath beguil’d thee, yet unknown,<br/>
And mee with thee hath ruind, for with thee<br/>
Certain my resolution is to Die;<br/>
How can I live without thee, how forgoe<br/>
Thy sweet Converse and Love so dearly joyn’d,<br/>
To live again in these wilde Woods forlorn?<br/>
Should God create another <i>Eve</i>, and I<br/>
Another Rib afford, yet loss of thee<br/>
Would never from my heart; no no, I feel<br/>
The Link of Nature draw me: Flesh of Flesh,<br/>
Bone of my Bone thou art, and from thy State<br/>
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So having said, as one from sad dismay<br/>
Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbd<br/>
Submitting to what seemd remediless,<br/>
Thus in calme mood his Words to <i>Eve</i> he turnd.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Bold deed thou hast presum’d, adventrous <i>Eve</i>,<br/>
And peril great provok’t, who thus hast dar’d<br/>
Had it bin onely coveting to Eye<br/>
That sacred Fruit, sacred to abstinence,<br/>
Much more to taste it under banne to touch.<br/>
But past who can recall, or don undoe?<br/>
Not God omnipotent, for Fate, yet so<br/>
Perhaps thou shalt not Die, perhaps the Fact<br/>
Is not so hainous now, foretasted Fruit,<br/>
Profan’d first by the Serpent, by him first<br/>
Made common and unhallowd: ere one tastes;<br/>
Nor yet on him found deadly; he yet lives,<br/>
Lives, as thou saidst, and gaines to live as Man<br/>
Higher degree of Life, inducement strong<br/>
To us, as likely tasting to attaine<br/>
Proportional ascent, which cannot be<br/>
But to be Gods, or Angels Demi-gods.<br/>
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise,<br/>
Though threatning, will in earnest so destroy<br/>
Us his prime Creatures, dignifi’d so high,<br/>
Set over all his Works, which in our Fall,<br/>
For us created, needs with us must faile,<br/>
Dependent made; so God shall uncreate,<br/>
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour loose,<br/>
Not well conceav’d of God, who though his Power<br/>
Creation could repeate, yet would be loath<br/>
Us to abolish, least the Adversary<br/>
Triumph and say; Fickle their State whom God<br/>
Most Favors, who can please him long?  Mee first<br/>
He ruind, now Mankind; whom will he next?<br/>
Matter of scorne, not to be given the Foe.<br/>
However I with thee have fixt my Lot,<br/>
Certain to undergoe like doom, if Death<br/>
Consort with thee, Death is to mee as Life;<br/>
So forcible within my heart I feel<br/>
The Bond of Nature draw me to my owne,<br/>
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine;<br/>
Our State cannot be severd, we are one,<br/>
One Flesh; to loose thee were to loose my self.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So <i>Adam</i>, and thus <i>Eve</i> to him repli’d.<br/>
O glorious trial of exceeding Love,<br/>
Illustrious evidence, example high!<br/>
Ingaging me to emulate, but short<br/>
Of thy perfection, how shall I attaine,<br/>
<i>Adam</i>, from whose deare side I boast me sprung,<br/>
And gladly of our Union heare thee speak,<br/>
One Heart, one Soul in both; whereof good prooff<br/>
This day affords, declaring thee resolvd,<br/>
Rather then Death or aught then Death more dread<br/>
Shall separate us, linkt in Love so deare,<br/>
To undergoe with mee one Guilt, one Crime,<br/>
If any be, of tasting this fair Fruit,<br/>
Whose vertue, for of good still good proceeds,<br/>
Direct, or by occasion hath presented<br/>
This happie trial of thy Love, which else<br/>
So eminently never had bin known.<br/>
Were it I thought Death menac’t would ensue<br/>
This my attempt, I would sustain alone<br/>
The worst, and not perswade thee, rather die<br/>
Deserted, then oblige thee with a fact<br/>
Pernicious to thy Peace, chiefly assur’d<br/>
Remarkably so late of thy so true,<br/>
So faithful Love unequald; but I feel<br/>
Farr otherwise th’ event, not Death, but Life<br/>
Augmented, op’nd Eyes, new Hopes, new Joyes,<br/>
Taste so Divine, that what of sweet before<br/>
Hath toucht my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh.<br/>
On my experience, <i>Adam</i>, freely taste,<br/>
And fear of Death deliver to the Windes.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So saying, she embrac’d him, and for joy<br/>
Tenderly wept, much won that he his Love<br/>
Had so enobl’d, as of choice to incurr<br/>
Divine displeasure for her sake, or Death.<br/>
In recompence (for such compliance bad<br/>
Such recompence best merits) from the bough<br/>
She gave him of that fair enticing Fruit<br/>
With liberal hand: he scrupl’d not to eat<br/>
Against his better knowledge, not deceav’d,<br/>
But fondly overcome with Femal charm.<br/>
Earth trembl’d from her entrails, as again<br/>
In pangs, and Nature gave a second groan,<br/>
Skie lowr’d, and muttering Thunder, som sad drops<br/>
Wept at compleating of the mortal Sin<br/>
Original; while <i>Adam</i> took no thought,<br/>
Eating his fill, nor <i>Eve</i> to iterate<br/>
Her former trespass fear’d, the more to soothe<br/>
Him with her lov’d societie, that now<br/>
As with new Wine intoxicated both<br/>
They swim in mirth, and fansie that they feel<br/>
Divinitie within them breeding wings<br/>
Wherewith to scorn the Earth: but that false Fruit<br/>
Farr other operation first displaid,<br/>
Carnal desire enflaming, hee on <i>Eve</i><br/>
Began to cast lascivious Eyes, she him<br/>
As wantonly repaid; in Lust they burne:<br/>
Till <i>Adam</i> thus ’gan <i>Eve</i> to dalliance move.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
<i>Eve</i>, now I see thou art exact of taste,<br/>
And elegant, of Sapience no small part,<br/>
Since to each meaning savour we apply,<br/>
And Palate call judicious; I the praise<br/>
Yeild thee, so well this day thou hast purvey’d.<br/>
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstain’d<br/>
From this delightful Fruit, nor known till now<br/>
True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be<br/>
In things to us forbidden, it might be wish’d,<br/>
For this one Tree had bin forbidden ten.<br/>
But come, so well refresh’t, now let us play,<br/>
As meet is, after such delicious Fare;<br/>
For never did thy Beautie since the day<br/>
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorn’d<br/>
With all perfections, so enflame my sense<br/>
With ardor to enjoy thee, fairer now<br/>
Then ever, bountie of this vertuous Tree.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So said he, and forbore not glance or toy<br/>
Of amorous intent, well understood<br/>
Of <i>Eve</i>, whose Eye darted contagious Fire.<br/>
Her hand he seis’d, and to a shadie bank,<br/>
Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowr’d<br/>
He led her nothing loath; Flours were the Couch,<br/>
Pansies, and Violets, and Asphodel,<br/>
And Hyacinth, Earths freshest softest lap.<br/>
There they thir fill of Love and Loves disport<br/>
Took largely, of thir mutual guilt the Seale,<br/>
The solace of thir sin, till dewie sleep<br/>
Oppress’d them, wearied with thir amorous play.<br/>
Soon as the force of that fallacious Fruit,<br/>
That with exhilerating vapour bland<br/>
About thir spirits had plaid, and inmost powers<br/>
Made erre, was now exhal’d, and grosser sleep<br/>
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams<br/>
Encumberd, now had left them, up they rose<br/>
As from unrest, and each the other viewing,<br/>
Soon found thir Eyes how op’nd, and thir minds<br/>
How dark’nd; innocence, that as a veile<br/>
Had shadow’d them from knowing ill, was gon,<br/>
Just confidence, and native righteousness,<br/>
And honour from about them, naked left<br/>
To guiltie shame hee cover’d, but his Robe<br/>
Uncover’d more.  So rose the <i>Danite</i> strong<br/>
<i>Herculean Samson</i> from the Harlot-lap<br/>
Of <i>Philistean Dalilah</i>, and wak’d<br/>
Shorn of his strength, They destitute and bare<br/>
Of all thir vertue: silent, and in face<br/>
Confounded long they sate, as struck’n mute,<br/>
Till <i>Adam</i>, though not less then <i>Eve</i> abasht,<br/>
At length gave utterance to these words constraind.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
O <i>Eve</i>, in evil hour thou didst give care<br/>
To that false Worm, of whomsoever taught<br/>
To counterfet Mans voice, true in our Fall,<br/>
False in our promis’d Rising; since our Eyes<br/>
Op’nd we find indeed, and find we know<br/>
Both Good and Evil, Good lost and Evil got,<br/>
Bad Fruit of Knowledge, if this be to know,<br/>
Which leaves us naked thus, of Honour void,<br/>
Of Innocence, of Faith, of Puritie,<br/>
Our wonted Ornaments now soild and staind,<br/>
And in our Faces evident the signes<br/>
Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store;<br/>
Even shame, the last of evils; of the first<br/>
Be sure then.  How shall I behold the face<br/>
Henceforth of God or Angel, earst with joy<br/>
And rapture so oft beheld? those heav’nly shapes<br/>
Will dazle now this earthly, with thir blaze<br/>
Insufferably bright.  O might I here<br/>
In solitude live savage, in some glad<br/>
Obscur’d, where highest Woods impenetrable<br/>
To Starr or Sun-light, spread thir umbrage broad,<br/>
And brown as Evening: Cover me ye Pines,<br/>
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs<br/>
Hide me, where I may never see them more.<br/>
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise<br/>
What best may for the present serve to hide<br/>
The Parts of each from other, that seem most<br/>
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen,<br/>
Some Tree whose broad smooth Leaves together sowd,<br/>
And girded on our loyns, may cover round<br/>
Those middle parts, that this new commer, Shame,<br/>
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
So counsel’d hee, and both together went<br/>
Into the thickest Wood, there soon they chose<br/>
The Figtree, not that kind for Fruit renown’d,<br/>
But such as at this day to <i>Indians</i> known<br/>
In <i>Malabar</i> or <i>Decan</i> spreds her Armes<br/>
Braunching so broad and long, that in the ground<br/>
The bended Twigs take root, and Daughters grow<br/>
About the Mother Tree, a Pillard shade<br/>
High overarch’t, and echoing Walks between;<br/>
There oft the <i>Indian</i> Herdsman shunning heate<br/>
Shelters in coole, and tends his pasturing Herds<br/>
At Loopholes cut through thickest shade: Those Leaves<br/>
They gatherd, broad as <i>Amazonian</i> Targe,<br/>
And with what skill they had, together sowd,<br/>
To gird thir waste, vain Covering if to hide<br/>
Thir guilt and dreaded shame; O how unlike<br/>
To that first naked Glorie.  Such of late<br/>
<i>Columbus</i> found th’ <i>American</i> to girt<br/>
With featherd Cincture, naked else and wilde<br/>
Among the Trees on Iles and woodie Shores.<br/>
Thus fenc’t, and as they thought, thir shame in part<br/>
Coverd, but not at rest or ease of Mind,<br/>
They sate them down to weep, nor onely Teares<br/>
Raind at thir Eyes, but high Winds worse within<br/>
Began to rise, high Passions, Anger, Hate,<br/>
Mistrust, Suspicion, Discord, and shook sore<br/>
Thir inward State of Mind, calme Region once<br/>
And full of Peace, now tost and turbulent:<br/>
For Understanding rul’d not, and the Will<br/>
Heard not her lore, both in subjection now<br/>
To sensual Appetite, who from beneathe<br/>
Usurping over sovran Reason claimd<br/>
Superior sway: From thus distemperd brest,<br/>
<i>Adam</i>, estrang’d in look and alterd stile,<br/>
Speech intermitted thus to <i>Eve</i> renewd.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Would thou hadst heark’nd to my words, &amp; stai’d<br/>
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange<br/>
Desire of wandring this unhappie Morn,<br/>
I know not whence possessd thee; we had then<br/>
Remaind still happie, not as now, despoild<br/>
Of all our good, sham’d, naked, miserable.<br/>
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve<br/>
The Faith they owe; when earnestly they seek<br/>
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to faile.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
To whom soon mov’d with touch of blame thus <i>Eve</i>.<br/>
What words have past thy Lips, <i>Adam</i> severe,<br/>
Imput’st thou that to my default, or will<br/>
Of wandering, as thou call’st it, which who knows<br/>
But might as ill have happ’nd thou being by,<br/>
Or to thy self perhaps: hadst thou bin there,<br/>
Or bere th’ attempt, thou couldst not have discernd<br/>
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake;<br/>
No ground of enmitie between us known,<br/>
Why hee should mean me ill, or seek to harme.<br/>
Was I to have never parted from thy side?<br/>
As good have grown there still a liveless Rib.<br/>
Being as I am, why didst not thou the Head<br/>
Command me absolutely not to go,<br/>
Going into such danger as thou saidst?<br/>
Too facil then thou didst not much gainsay,<br/>
Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss.<br/>
Hadst thou bin firm and fixt in thy dissent,<br/>
Neither had I transgress’d, nor thou with mee.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
To whom then first incenst <i>Adam</i> repli’d.<br/>
Is this the Love, is the recompence<br/>
Of mine to thee, ingrateful <i>Eve</i>, exprest<br/>
Immutable when thou wert lost, not I,<br/>
Who might have liv’d and joyd immortal bliss,<br/>
Yet willingly chose rather Death with thee:<br/>
And am I now upbraided, as the cause<br/>
Of thy transgressing? not enough severe,<br/>
It seems, in thy restraint: what could I more?<br/>
I warn’d thee, I admonish’d thee, foretold<br/>
The danger, and the lurking Enemie<br/>
That lay in wait; beyond this had bin force,<br/>
And force upon free Will hath here no place.<br/>
But confidence then bore thee on, secure<br/>
Either to meet no danger, or to finde<br/>
Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps<br/>
I also err’d in overmuch admiring<br/>
What seemd in thee so perfet, that I thought<br/>
No evil durst attempt thee, but I rue<br/>
That errour now, which is become my crime,<br/>
And thou th’ accuser.  Thus it shall befall<br/>
Him who to worth in Women overtrusting<br/>
Lets her Will rule; restraint she will not brook,<br/>
And left to her self, if evil thence ensue,<br/>
Shee first his weak indulgence will accuse.<br/>
</p>
<p class="poem">
Thus they in mutual accusation spent<br/>
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning<br/>
And of thir vain contest appeer’d no end.<br/>
</p>
<h5>       THE END OF THE EIGHTH BOOK.</h5>
<h4>  PARADISE LOST</h4>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0009" name="link2HCH0009">
<!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
</section></body></html>