<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
					<p>
						<span>Now Morn her rosie steps in th’ Eastern Clime</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Advancing, sow’d the Earth with Orient Pearle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When <i>Adam</i> wak’t, so customd, for his sleep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was Aerie light, from pure digestion bred,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And temperat vapors bland, which th’ only sound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of leaves and fuming rills, <i>Aurora’s</i> fan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lightly dispers’d, and the shrill Matin Song</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Birds on every bough; so much the more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His wonder was to find unwak’nd <i>Eve</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Tresses discompos’d, and glowing Cheek,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As through unquiet rest: he on his side</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leaning half-rais’d, with looks of cordial Love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hung over her enamour’d, and beheld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beautie, which whether waking or asleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shot forth peculiar Graces; then with voice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Milde, as when <i>Zephyrus</i> on <i>Flora</i> breathes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her hand soft touching, whisperd thus.  Awake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My fairest, my espous’d, my latest found,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heav’ns last best gift, my ever new delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh field</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Calls us, we lose the prime, to mark how spring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What drops the Myrrhe, &amp; what the balmie Reed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How Nature paints her colours, how the Bee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sits on the Bloom extracting liquid sweet.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Such whispering wak’d her, but with startl’d eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On <i>Adam</i>, whom imbracing, thus she spake.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Glorie, my Perfection, glad I see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy face, and Morn return’d, for I this Night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such night till this I never pass’d, have dream’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If dream’d, not as I oft am wont, of thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Works of day pass’t, or morrows next designe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But of offence and trouble, which my mind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knew never till this irksom night; methought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Close at mine ear one call’d me forth to walk</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With gentle voice, I thought it thine; it said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why sleepst thou <i>Eve</i>? now is the pleasant time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The cool, the silent, save where silence yields</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the night-warbling Bird, that now awake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tunes sweetest his love-labor’d song; now reignes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full Orb’d the Moon, and with more pleasing light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shadowie sets off the face of things; in vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If none regard; Heav’n wakes with all his eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To find thee I directed then my walk;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on, methought, alone I pass’d through ways</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That brought me on a sudden to the Tree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it seem’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much fairer to my Fancie then by day:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as I wondring lookt, beside it stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One shap’d &amp; wing’d like one of those from Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By us oft seen; his dewie locks distill’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ambrosia; on that Tree he also gaz’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And O fair Plant, said he, with fruit surcharg’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despis’d?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or envie, or what reserve forbids to taste?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Longer thy offerd good, why else set here?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This said he paus’d not, but with ventrous Arme</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He pluckt, he tasted; mee damp horror chil’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At such bold words voucht with a deed so bold:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But he thus overjoy’d, O Fruit Divine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forbidd’n here, it seems, as onely fit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Communicated, more abundant growes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Author not impair’d, but honourd more?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here, happie Creature, fair Angelic <i>Eve</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Partake thou also; happie though thou art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Happier thou mayst be, worthier canst not be:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But somtimes in the Air, as wee, somtimes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ascend to Heav’n, by merit thine, and see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What life the Gods live there, and such live thou.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which he had pluckt; the pleasant savourie smell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So quick’nd appetite, that I, methought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could not but taste.  Forthwith up to the Clouds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With him I flew, and underneath beheld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Earth outstretcht immense, a prospect wide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And various: wondring at my flight and change</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To this high exaltation; suddenly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fell asleep; but O how glad I wak’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To find this but a dream!  Thus <i>Eve</i> her Night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Related, and thus <i>Adam</i> answerd sad.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Best Image of my self and dearer half,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Affects me equally; nor can I like</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Created pure.  But know that in the Soule</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are many lesser Faculties that serve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reason as chief; among these Fansie next</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her office holds; of all external things,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which the five watchful Senses represent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which Reason joyning or disjoyning, frames</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All what we affirm or what deny, and call</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our knowledge or opinion; then retires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into her private Cell when Nature rests.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oft in her absence mimic Fansie wakes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To imitate her; but misjoyning shapes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Som such resemblances methinks I find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of our last Eevnings talk, in this thy dream,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But with addition strange; yet be not sad.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Evil into the mind of God or Man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May come and go, so unapprov’d, and leave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That what in sleep thou didst abhorr to dream,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Waking thou never wilt consent to do.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be not disheart’nd then, nor cloud those looks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That wont to be more chearful and serene</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let us to our fresh imployments rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the Groves, the Fountains, and the Flours</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That open now thir choicest bosom’d smells</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reservd from night, and kept for thee in store.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So cheard he his fair Spouse, and she was cheard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But silently a gentle tear let fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From either eye, and wip’d them with her haire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two other precious drops that ready stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each in thir chrystal sluce, hee ere they fell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kiss’d as the gracious signs of sweet remorse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pious awe, that feard to have offended.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So all was cleard, and to the Field they haste.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But first from under shadie arborous roof,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soon as they forth were come to open sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of day-spring, and the Sun, who scarce up risen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With wheels yet hov’ring o’re the Ocean brim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shot paralel to the earth his dewie ray,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discovering in wide Lantskip all the East</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Paradise and <i>Edens</i> happie Plains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lowly they bow’d adoring, and began</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir Orisons, each Morning duly paid</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In various style, for neither various style</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir Maker, in fit strains pronounc’t or sung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unmeditated, such prompt eloquence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flowd from thir lips, in Prose or numerous Verse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More tuneable then needed Lute or Harp</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To add more sweetness, and they thus began.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Almightie, thine this universal Frame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus wondrous fair; thy self how wondrous then!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unspeakable, who sitst above these Heavens</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To us invisible or dimly seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In these thy lowest works, yet these declare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy goodness beyond thought, and Power Divine:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Speak yee who best can tell, ye Sons of light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Angels, for yee behold him, and with songs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And choral symphonies, Day without Night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Circle his Throne rejoycing, yee in Heav’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On Earth joyn all yee Creatures to extoll</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fairest of Starrs, last in the train of Night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If better thou belong not to the dawn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sure pledge of day, that crownst the smiling Morn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy Spheare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While day arises, that sweet hour of Prime.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soule,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Acknowledge him thy Greater, sound his praise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In thy eternal course, both when thou climb’st,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when high Noon hast gaind, &amp; when thou fallst.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Moon, that now meetst the orient Sun, now fli’st</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the fixt Starrs, fixt in thir Orb that flies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yee five other wandring Fires that move</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In mystic Dance not without Song, resound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His praise, who out of Darkness call’d up Light.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aire, and ye Elements the eldest birth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Natures Womb, that in quaternion run</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perpetual Circle, multiform; and mix</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And nourish all things, let your ceasless change</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Varie to our great Maker still new praise.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Hill or steaming Lake, duskie or grey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till the Sun paint your fleecie skirts with Gold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In honour to the Worlds great Author rise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolourd skie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or wet the thirstie Earth with falling showers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rising or falling still advance his praise.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His praise ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Breath soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fountains and yee, that warble, as ye flow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Joyn voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That singing up to Heaven Gate ascend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yee that in Waters glide, and yee that walk</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Witness if I be silent, Morn or Eeven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Hill, or Valley, Fountain, or fresh shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praise.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hail universal Lord, be bounteous still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To give us onely good; and if the night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have gathered aught of evil or conceald,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So pray’d they innocent, and to thir thoughts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Firm peace recoverd soon and wonted calm.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On to thir mornings rural work they haste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among sweet dewes and flours; where any row</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Fruit-trees overwoodie reachd too farr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir pamperd boughes, and needed hands to check</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fruitless imbraces: or they led the Vine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To wed her Elm; she spous’d about him twines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her mariageable arms, and with her brings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her dowr th’ adopted Clusters, to adorn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His barren leaves.  Them thus imploid beheld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With pittie Heav’ns high King, and to him call’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Raphael</i>, the sociable Spirit, that deign’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To travel with <i>Tobias</i>, and secur’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His marriage with the seaventimes-wedded Maid.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span><i>Raphael</i>, said hee, thou hear’st what stir on Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Satan</i> from Hell scap’t through the darksom Gulf</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath raisd in Paradise, and how disturbd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This night the human pair, how he designes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In them at once to ruin all mankind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Converse with <i>Adam</i>, in what Bowre or shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou find’st him from the heat of Noon retir’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To respit his day-labour with repast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As may advise him of his happie state,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Happiness in his power left free to will,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Left to his own free Will, his Will though free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet mutable; whence warne him to beware</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He swerve not too secure: tell him withall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His danger, and from whom, what enemie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Late falln himself from Heav’n, is plotting now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fall of others from like state of bliss;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By violence, no, for that shall be withstood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But by deceit and lies; this let him know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Least wilfully transgressing he pretend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Surprisal, unadmonisht, unforewarnd.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake th’ Eternal Father, and fulfilld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Justice: nor delaid the winged Saint</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After his charge receivd, but from among</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thousand Celestial Ardors, where he stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vaild with his gorgeous wings, up springing light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flew through the midst of Heav’n; th’ angelic Quires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On each hand parting, to his speed gave way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through all th’ Empyreal road; till at the Gate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Heav’n arriv’d, the gate self-opend wide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On golden Hinges turning, as by work</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divine the sov’ran Architect had fram’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From hence, no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Starr interpos’d, however small he sees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not unconform to other shining Globes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Earth and the Gard’n of God, with Cedars crownd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above all Hills.  As when by night the Glass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of <i>Galileo</i>, less assur’d, observes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imagind Lands and Regions in the Moon:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or Pilot from amidst the <i>Cyclades</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Delos</i> or <i>Samos</i> first appeering kenns</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A cloudy spot.  Down thither prone in flight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He speeds, and through the vast Ethereal Skie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sailes between worlds &amp; worlds, with steddie wing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now on the polar windes, then with quick Fann</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Winnows the buxom Air; till within soare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Towring Eagles, to all the Fowles he seems</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A <i>Phoenix</i>, gaz’d by all, as that sole Bird</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When to enshrine his reliques in the Sun’s</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bright Temple, to <i>Aegyptian Theb’s</i> he flies.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At once on th’ Eastern cliff of Paradise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He lights, and to his proper shape returns</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Seraph wingd; six wings he wore, to shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His lineaments Divine; the pair that clad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each shoulder broad, came mantling o’re his brest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With regal Ornament; the middle pair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Girt like a Starrie Zone his waste, and round</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Skirted his loines and thighes with downie Gold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And colours dipt in Heav’n; the third his feet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shaddowd from either heele with featherd maile</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Skie-tinctur’d grain.  Like <i>Maia’s</i> son he stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shook his Plumes, that Heav’nly fragrance filld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The circuit wide.  Strait knew him all the bands</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Angels under watch; and to his state,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to his message high in honour rise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For on som message high they guessd him bound.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir glittering Tents he passd, and now is come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the blissful field, through Groves of Myrrhe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And flouring Odours, Cassia, Nard, and Balme;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Wilderness of sweets; for Nature here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wantond as in her prime, and plaid at will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wilde above rule or art; enormous bliss.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him through the spicie Forrest onward com</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Adam</i> discernd, as in the dore he sat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his coole Bowre, while now the mounted Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shot down direct his fervid Raies, to warme</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Earths inmost womb, more warmth then <i>Adam</i> need;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And <i>Eve</i> within, due at her hour prepar’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For dinner savourie fruits, of taste to please</span>
						<br/>
						<span>True appetite, and not disrelish thirst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of nectarous draughts between, from milkie stream,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Berrie or Grape: to whom thus <i>Adam</i> call’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Haste hither <i>Eve</i>, and worth thy sight behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eastward among those Trees, what glorious shape</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Comes this way moving; seems another Morn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ris’n on mid-noon; som great behest from Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To us perhaps he brings, and will voutsafe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This day to be our Guest.  But goe with speed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what thy stores contain, bring forth and poure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Abundance, fit to honour and receive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our Heav’nly stranger; well we may afford</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our givers thir own gifts, and large bestow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From large bestowd, where Nature multiplies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her fertil growth, and by disburd’ning grows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom thus <i>Eve</i>. <i>Adam</i>, earths hallowd mould,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of God inspir’d, small store will serve, where store,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save what by frugal storing firmness gains</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I will haste and from each bough and break,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each Plant &amp; juciest Gourd will pluck such choice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To entertain our Angel guest, as hee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beholding shall confess that here on Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God hath dispenst his bounties as in Heav’n.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What choice to chuse for delicacie best,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What order, so contriv’d as not to mix</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tastes, not well joynd, inelegant, but bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whatever Earth all-bearing Mother yeilds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In <i>India</i> East or West, or middle shoare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In <i>Pontus</i> or the <i>Punic</i> Coast, or where</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Alcinous</i> reign’d, fruit of all kindes, in coate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rough, or smooth rin’d, or bearded husk, or shell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She gathers, Tribute large, and on the board</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the Grape</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She crushes, inoffensive moust, and meathes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From many a berrie, and from sweet kernels prest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She tempers dulcet creams, nor these to hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wants her fit vessels pure, then strews the ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Rose and Odours from the shrub unfum’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mean while our Primitive great Sire, to meet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His god-like Guest, walks forth, without more train</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accompani’d then with his own compleat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perfections, in himself was all his state,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More solemn then the tedious pomp that waits</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On Princes, when thir rich Retinue long</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Horses led, and Grooms besmeard with Gold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dazles the croud, and sets them all agape.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neerer his presence <i>Adam</i> though not awd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As to a superior Nature, bowing low,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus said.  Native of Heav’n, for other place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None can then Heav’n such glorious shape contain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since by descending from the Thrones above,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those happie places thou hast deignd a while</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To want, and honour these, voutsafe with us</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two onely, who yet by sov’ran gift possess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This spacious ground, in yonder shadie Bowre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sit and taste, till this meridian heat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be over, and the Sun more coole decline.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Whom thus the Angelic Vertue answerd milde.</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Adam</i>, I therefore came, nor art thou such</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Created, or such place hast here to dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To visit thee; lead on then where thy Bowre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oreshades; for these mid-hours, till Eevning rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have at will.  So to the Silvan Lodge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They came, that like <i>Pomona’s</i> Arbour smil’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With flourets deck’t and fragrant smells; but <i>Eve</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Undeckt, save with her self more lovely fair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feign’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of three that in Mount <i>Ida</i> naked strove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stood to entertain her guest from Heav’n; no vaile</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shee needed, Vertue-proof, no thought infirme</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alterd her cheek.  On whom the Angel <i>Haile</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bestowd, the holy salutation us’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long after to blest <i>Marie</i>, second <i>Eve</i>.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Haile Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful Womb</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall fill the World more numerous with thy Sons</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then with these various fruits the Trees of God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have heap’d this Table.  Rais’d of grassie terf</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thir Table was, and mossie seats had round,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on her ample Square from side to side</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All <i>Autumn</i> pil’d, though <i>Spring</i> and <i>Autumn</i> here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Danc’d hand in hand.  A while discourse they hold;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No fear lest Dinner coole; when thus began</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our Authour.  Heav’nly stranger, please to taste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These bounties which our Nourisher, from whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All perfet good unmeasur’d out, descends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To us for food and for delight hath caus’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Earth to yeild; unsavourie food perhaps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To spiritual Natures; only this I know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That one Celestial Father gives to all.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom the Angel.  Therefore what he gives</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Whose praise be ever sung) to man in part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No ingrateful food: and food alike those pure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Intelligential substances require</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As doth your Rational; and both contain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within them every lower facultie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And corporeal to incorporeal turn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For know, whatever was created, needs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be sustaind and fed; of Elements</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The grosser feeds the purer, earth the sea,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air those Fires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ethereal, and as lowest first the Moon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurg’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vapours not yet into her substance turnd.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor doth the Moon no nourishment exhale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From her moist Continent to higher Orbes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Sun that light imparts to all, receives</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From all his alimental recompence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In humid exhalations, and at Even</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sups with the Ocean: though in Heav’n the Trees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of life ambrosial frutage bear, and vines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yeild Nectar, though from off the boughs each Morn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We brush mellifluous Dewes, and find the ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cover’d with pearly grain: yet God hath here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Varied his bounty so with new delights,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As may compare with Heaven; and to taste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think not I shall be nice.  So down they sat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to thir viands fell, nor seemingly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Theologians, but with keen dispatch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of real hunger, and concoctive heate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To transubstantiate; what redounds, transpires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder; if by fire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sooty coal the Empiric Alchimist</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can turn, or holds it possible to turn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Metals of drossiest Ore to perfet Gold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As from the Mine.  Mean while at Table <i>Eve</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ministerd naked, and thir flowing cups</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With pleasant liquors crown’d: O innocence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deserving Paradise! if ever, then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then had the Sons of God excuse to have bin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enamour’d at that sight; but in those hearts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love unlibidinous reign’d, nor jealousie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was understood, the injur’d Lovers Hell.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus when with meats &amp; drinks they had suffic’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not burd’nd Nature, sudden mind arose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In <i>Adam</i>, not to let th’ occasion pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Given him by this great Conference to know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of things above his World, and of thir being</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who dwell in Heav’n, whose excellence he saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Transcend his own so farr, whose radiant forms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divine effulgence, whose high Power so far</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Exceeded human, and his wary speech</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus to th’ Empyreal Minister he fram’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Inhabitant with God, now know I well</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy favour, in this honour done to man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under whose lowly roof thou hast voutsaf’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Food not of Angels, yet accepted so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As that more willingly thou couldst not seem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At Heav’ns high feasts to have fed: yet what compare?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom the winged Hierarch repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O <i>Adam</i>, one Almightie is, from whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All things proceed, and up to him return,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If not deprav’d from good, created all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such to perfection, one first matter all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Indu’d with various forms, various degrees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of substance, and in things that live, of life;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But more refin’d, more spiritous, and pure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As neerer to him plac’t or neerer tending</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each in thir several active Sphears assignd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till body up to spirit work, in bounds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Proportiond to each kind.  So from the root</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More aerie, last the bright consummate floure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spirits odorous breathes: flours and thir fruit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mans nourishment, by gradual scale sublim’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To vital Spirits aspire, to animal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To intellectual, give both life and sense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fansie and understanding, whence the soule</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reason receives, and reason is her being,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discursive, or Intuitive; discourse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Differing but in degree, of kind the same.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wonder not then, what God for you saw good</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If I refuse not, but convert, as you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To proper substance; time may come when men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Angels may participate, and find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No inconvenient Diet, nor too light Fare:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from these corporal nutriments perhaps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your bodies may at last turn all to Spirit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Improv’d by tract of time, and wingd ascend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ethereal, as wee, or may at choice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here or in Heav’nly Paradises dwell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If ye be found obedient, and retain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unalterably firm his love entire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose progenie you are.  Mean while enjoy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your fill what happiness this happie state</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can comprehend, incapable of more.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom the Patriarch of mankind repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O favourable spirit, propitious guest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well hast thou taught the way that might direct</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our knowledge, and the scale of Nature set</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From center to circumference, whereon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In contemplation of created things</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By steps we may ascend to God.  But say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What meant that caution joind, <em>If ye be found</em></span>
						<br/>
						<span><em>obedient?</em> can wee want obedience then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To him, or possibly his love desert</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who formd us from the dust, and plac’d us here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full to the utmost measure of what bliss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Human desires can seek or apprehend?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom the Angel.  Son of Heav’n and Earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Attend: That thou art happie, owe to God;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thou continu’st such, owe to thy self,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That is, to thy obedience; therein stand.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This was that caution giv’n thee; be advis’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God made thee perfet, not immutable;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And good he made thee, but to persevere</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He left it in thy power, ordaind thy will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By nature free, not over-rul’d by Fate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inextricable, or strict necessity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our voluntarie service he requires,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not our necessitated, such with him</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Findes no acceptance, nor can find, for how</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can hearts, not free, be tri’d whether they serve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Willing or no, who will but what they must</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Destinie, and can no other choose?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My self and all th’ Angelic Host that stand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In sight of God enthron’d, our happie state</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On other surety none; freely we serve.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because wee freely love, as in our will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To love or not; in this we stand or fall:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And som are fall’n, to disobedience fall’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so from Heav’n to deepest Hell; O fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From what high state of bliss into what woe!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom our great Progenitor.  Thy words</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Attentive, and with more delighted eare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divine instructer, I have heard, then when</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cherubic Songs by night from neighbouring Hills</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aereal Music send: nor knew I not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be both will and deed created free;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet that we never shall forget to love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our maker, and obey him whose command</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Single, is yet so just, my constant thoughts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assur’d me and still assure: though what thou tellst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath past in Heav’n, som doubt within me move,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But more desire to hear, if thou consent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The full relation, which must needs be strange,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Worthy of Sacred silence to be heard;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we have yet large day, for scarce the Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath finisht half his journey, and scarce begins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His other half in the great Zone of Heav’n.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus <i>Adam</i> made request, and <i>Raphael</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>After short pause assenting, thus began.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>High matter thou injoinst me, O prime of men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sad task and hard, for how shall I relate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To human sense th’ invisible exploits</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of warring Spirits; how without remorse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ruin of so many glorious once</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And perfet while they stood; how last unfould</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The secrets of another world, perhaps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is dispenc’t, and what surmounts the reach</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of human sense, I shall delineate so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By lik’ning spiritual to corporal forms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As may express them best, though what if Earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be but the shaddow of Heav’n, and things therein</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each to other like, more then on earth is thought?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>As yet this world was not, and <i>Chaos</i> wilde</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reignd where these Heav’ns now rowl, where Earth now rests</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon her Center pois’d, when on a day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For Time, though in Eternitie, appli’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To motion, measures all things durable</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By present, past, and future) on such day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Heav’ns great Year brings forth, th’ Empyreal Host</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Angels by Imperial summons call’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Innumerable before th’ Almighties Throne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forthwith from all the ends of Heav’n appeerd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under thir Hierarchs in orders bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ten thousand thousand Ensignes high advanc’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Standards, and Gonfalons twixt Van and Reare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Streame in the Aire, and for distinction serve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Hierarchies, of Orders, and Degrees;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or in thir glittering Tissues bear imblaz’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Holy Memorials, acts of Zeale and Love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Recorded eminent.  Thus when in Orbes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of circuit inexpressible they stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Orb within Orb, the Father infinite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By whom in bliss imbosom’d sat the Son,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amidst as from a flaming Mount, whoseop</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brightness had made invisible, thus spake.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Hear all ye Angels, Progenie of Light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hear my Decree, which unrevok’t shall stand.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This day I have begot whom I declare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My onely Son, and on this holy Hill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him have anointed, whom ye now behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At my right hand; your Head I him appoint;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by my Self have sworn to him shall bow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All knees in Heav’n, and shall confess him Lord:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under his great Vice-gerent Reign abide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>United as one individual Soule</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ever happie: him who disobeyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mee disobeyes, breaks union, and that day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into utter darkness, deep ingulft, his place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ordaind without redemption, without end.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake th’ Omnipotent, and with his words</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All seemd well pleas’d, all seem’d, but were not all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That day, as other solem dayes, they spent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In song and dance about the sacred Hill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mystical dance, which yonder starrie Spheare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Planets and of fixt in all her Wheeles</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eccentric, intervolv’d, yet regular</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then most, when most irregular they seem:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in thir motions harmonie Divine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Listens delighted.  Eevning approachd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For we have also our Eevning and our Morn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We ours for change delectable, not need)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Desirous, all in Circles as they stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tables are set, and on a sudden pil’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Angels Food, and rubied Nectar flows:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Pearl, in Diamond, and massie Gold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fruit of delicious Vines, the growth of Heav’n.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They eat, they drink, and with refection sweet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are fill’d, before th’ all bounteous King, who showrd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With copious hand, rejoycing in thir joy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now when ambrosial Night with Clouds exhal’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From that high mount of God, whence light &amp; shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spring both, the face of brightest Heav’n had changd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To grateful Twilight (for Night comes not there</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In darker veile) and roseat Dews dispos’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wide over all the Plain, and wider farr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then all this globous Earth in Plain outspred,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Such are the Courts of God) Th’ Angelic throng</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disperst in Bands and Files thir Camp extend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By living Streams among the Trees of Life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pavilions numberless, and sudden reard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Celestial Tabernacles, where they slept</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fannd with coole Winds, save those who in thir course</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Melodious Hymns about the sovran Throne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alternate all night long: but not so wak’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Satan</i>, so call him now, his former name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is heard no more Heav’n; he of the first,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If not the first Arch-Angel, great in Power,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In favour and praeeminence, yet fraught</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With envie against the Son of God, that day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honourd by his great Father, and proclaimd</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Messiah</i> King anointed, could not beare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaird.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deep malice thence conceiving &amp; disdain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soon as midnight brought on the duskie houre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolv’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With all his Legions to dislodge, and leave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unworshipt, unobey’d the Throne supream</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Contemptuous, and his next subordinate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Awak’ning, thus to him in secret spake.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Sleepst thou Companion dear, what sleep can close</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy eye-lids? and remembrest what Decree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of yesterday, so late hath past the lips</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Heav’ns Almightie.  Thou to me thy thoughts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both waking we were one; how then can now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy sleep dissent? new Laws thou seest impos’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>New Laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In us who serve, new Counsels, to debate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What doubtful may ensue, more in this place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To utter is not safe.  Assemble thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all those Myriads which we lead the chief;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell them that by command, ere yet dim Night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her shadowie Cloud withdraws, I am to haste,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all who under me thir Banners wave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Homeward with flying march where we possess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Quarters of the North, there to prepare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fit entertainment to receive our King</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The great <i>Messiah</i>, and his new commands,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who speedily through all the Hierarchies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Intends to pass triumphant, and give Laws.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infus’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bad influence into th’ unwarie brest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his Associate; hee together calls,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or several one by one, the Regent Powers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under him Regent, tells, as he was taught,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That the most High commanding, now ere Night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now ere dim Night had disincumberd Heav’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The great Hierarchal Standard was to move;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tells the suggested cause, and casts between</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or taint integritie; but all obey’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wonted signal, and superior voice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of thir great Potentate; for great indeed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His name, and high was his degree in Heav’n;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His count’nance, as the Morning Starr that guides</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The starrie flock, allur’d them, and with lyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drew after him the third part of Heav’ns Host:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mean while th’ Eternal eye, whose sight discernes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy Mount</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from within the golden Lamps that burne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nightly before him, saw without thir light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rebellion rising, saw in whom, how spred</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the sons of Morn, what multitudes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were banded to oppose his high Decree;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And smiling to his onely Son thus said.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Son, thou in whom my glory I behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In full resplendence, Heir of all my might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neerly it now concernes us to be sure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We mean to hold what anciently we claim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Deitie or Empire, such a foe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is rising, who intends to erect his Throne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor so content, hath in his thought to trie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In battel, what our Power is, or our right.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let us advise, and to this hazard draw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With speed what force is left, and all imploy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In our defence, lest unawares we lose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This our high place, our Sanctuarie, our Hill.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To whom the Son with calm aspect and cleer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Light’ning Divine, ineffable, serene,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made answer.  Mightie Father, thou thy foes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Justly hast in derision, and secure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Laugh’st at thir vain designes and tumults vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Matter to mee of Glory, whom thir hate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Illustrates, when they see all Regal Power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Giv’n me to quell thir pride, and in event</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know whether I be dextrous to subdue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy Rebels, or be found the worst in Heav’n.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake the Son, but <i>Satan</i> with his Powers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farr was advanc’t on winged speed, an Host</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Innumerable as the Starrs of Night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or Starrs of Morning, Dew-drops, which the Sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impearls on every leaf and every flouer.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Regions they pass’d, the mightie Regencies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Seraphim and Potentates and Thrones</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In thir triple Degrees, Regions to which</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All thy Dominion, <i>Adam</i>, is no more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then what this Garden is to all the Earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the Sea, from one entire globose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stretcht into Longitude; which having pass’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At length into the limits of the North</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They came, and <i>Satan</i> to his Royal seat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>High on a Hill, far blazing, as a Mount</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rais’d on a Mount, with Pyramids and Towrs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Diamond Quarries hew’n, &amp; Rocks of Gold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Palace of great <i>Lucifer</i>, (so call</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Structure in the Dialect of men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Interpreted) which not long after, hee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Affecting all equality with God,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In imitation of that Mount whereon</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Messiah</i> was declar’d in sight of Heav’n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Mountain of the Congregation call’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For thither he assembl’d all his Train,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pretending so commanded to consult</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About the great reception of thir King,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thither to come, and with calumnious Art</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of counterfeted truth thus held thir ears.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thrones, Dominations, Princedomes, Vertues, Powers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If these magnific Titles yet remain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not meerly titular, since by Decree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another now hath to himself ingross’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Power, and us eclipst under the name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of King anointed, for whom all this haste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This onely to consult how we may best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With what may be devis’d of honours new</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Receive him coming to receive from us</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too much to one, but double how endur’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To one and to his image now proclaim’d?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But what if better counsels might erect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our minds and teach us to cast off this Yoke?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will ye submit your necks, and chuse to bend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To know ye right, or if ye know your selves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Natives and Sons of Heav’n possest before</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By none, and if not equal all, yet free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Equally free; for Orders and Degrees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jarr not with liberty, but well consist.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who can in reason then or right assume</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Monarchie over such as live by right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His equals, if in power and splendor less,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In freedome equal? or can introduce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Law and Edict on us, who without law</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Erre not, much less for this to be our Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And look for adoration to th’ abuse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of those Imperial Titles which assert</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our being ordain’d to govern, not to serve?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus farr his bold discourse without controule</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had audience, when among the Seraphim</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i>Abdiel</i>, then whom none with more zeale ador’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Deitie, and divine commands obei’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stood up, and in a flame of zeale severe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The current of his fury thus oppos’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O argument blasphemous, false and proud!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Words which no eare ever to hear in Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In place thy self so high above thy Peeres.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Canst thou with impious obloquie condemne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The just Decree of God, pronounc’t and sworn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That to his only Son by right endu’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Regal Scepter, every Soule in Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Confess him rightful King? unjust thou saist</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flatly unjust, to binde with Laws the free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And equal over equals to let Reigne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One over all with unsucceeded power.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shalt thou give Law to God, shalt thou dispute</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With him the points of libertie, who made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thee what thou art, &amp; formd the Pow’rs of Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such as he pleasd, and circumscrib’d thir being?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet by experience taught we know how good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of our good, and of our dignitie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How provident he is, how farr from thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make us less, bent rather to exalt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our happie state under one Head more neer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>United.  But to grant it thee unjust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That equal over equals Monarch Reigne:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy self though great &amp; glorious dost thou count,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or all Angelic Nature joind in one,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Equal to him begotten Son, by whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As by his Word the mighty Father made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All things, ev’n thee, and all the Spirits of Heav’n</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By him created in thir bright degrees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crownd them with Glory, &amp; to thir Glory nam’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Essential Powers, nor by his Reign obscur’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But more illustrious made, since he the Head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One of our number thus reduc’t becomes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Laws our Laws, all honour to him done</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Returns our own.  Cease then this impious rage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tempt not these; but hast’n to appease</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ incensed Father, and th’ incensed Son,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While Pardon may be found in time besought.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake the fervent Angel, but his zeale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None seconded, as out of season judg’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or singular and rash, whereat rejoic’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Apostat, and more haughty thus repli’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That we were formd then saist thou? &amp; the work</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of secondarie hands, by task transferd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Father to his Son? strange point and new!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doctrin which we would know whence learnt: who saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When this creation was? rememberst thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We know no time when we were not as now;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know none before us, self-begot, self-rais’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By our own quick’ning power, when fatal course</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had circl’d his full Orbe, the birth mature</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of this our native Heav’n, Ethereal Sons.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our puissance is our own, our own right hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who is our equal: then thou shalt behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether by supplication we intend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Address, and to begirt th’ Almighty Throne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beseeching or besieging.  This report,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These tidings carrie to th’ anointed King;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He said, and as the sound of waters deep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hoarce murmur echo’d to his words applause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through the infinite Host, nor less for that</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Encompass’d round with foes, thus answerd bold.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O alienate from God, O spirit accurst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forsak’n of all good; I see thy fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Determind, and thy hapless crew involv’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this perfidious fraud, contagion spred</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both of thy crime and punishment: henceforth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No more be troubl’d how to quit the yoke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Gods <i>Messiah</i>; those indulgent Laws</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will not be now voutsaf’t, other Decrees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against thee are gon forth without recall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Golden Scepter which thou didst reject</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is now an Iron Rod to bruise and breake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy disobedience.  Well thou didst advise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet not for thy advise or threats I fly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These wicked Tents devoted, least the wrauth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impendent, raging into sudden flame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Distinguish not: for soon expect to feel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then who created thee lamenting learne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So spake the Seraph <i>Abdiel</i> faithful found,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the faithless, faithful only hee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among innumerable false, unmov’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unshak’n, unseduc’d, unterrifi’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His Loyaltie he kept, his Love, his Zeale;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor number, nor example with him wrought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though single.  From amidst them forth he passd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long way through hostile scorn, which he susteind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Superior, nor of violence fear’d aught;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with retorted scorn his back he turn’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On those proud Towrs to swift destruction doom’d.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
